Ajai Kumar Chauhan vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 29
January, 2025
Author: B.R. Gavai
Bench: B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 140                                                        NON-REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.__________OF 2025
                                    (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 9115 of 2018)
                            AJAI KUMAR CHAUHAN                         …APPELLANT(S)
                                                      VERSUS
                            THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH              …RESPONDENT(S)
                                                  JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal challenges the judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of
Judicature at Allahabad dated 3rd May, 2018 in Criminal Appeal No.1914 of 1986, thereby
dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant, which in turn challenged the judgment and order
passed by the VIth Additional Sessions Judge, Mainpuri dated 30th June, 1986 in Sessions Trial
No.390 of 1985, thereby convicting the appellant for offence under Section 302 of the 14:24:17 IST
Reason:
Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘IPC’) and sentencing him to suffer rigorous
imprisonment for life along with a fine of Rs.5,000/-.
3. The case of the prosecution, shorn of details, is as under:
3.1 Pradeep Kumar (PW.2), Rajeev (deceased) and Desh Raj (PW.3) and Amar
(PW.4) were sitting on the rooftop on the date of incident i.e. on 19th March, 1985 at
around 8:30 p.m. It is the case of the prosecution that the deceased, who was a
student of B.Sc., was studying while sitting on the rooftop of the building. At around
8.30 p.m., Ajai Kumar (accused) came to the door of the deceased/Rajeev and calledAjai Kumar Chauhan vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 29 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/33319845/ 1

him to come downstairs. The deceased/Rajeev therefore went downstairs alone. After
some time, the witnesses heard cries of the deceased “Dada ana, mujhe mar dala”.
Upon hearing the same, Pradeep Kumar (PW.2) rushed downstairs. The other
witnesses also came running and saw that accused-
Ajai Kumar was causing knife injuries to the deceased. All of them intervened and apprehended
accused-Ajai Kumar and handed him over to the police. In the meantime, the accused threw his
knife in the water tank situated in the premises of the cold storage. For medical treatment, the
deceased was initially taken to Dr. Kunwar Pal (PW.7) and after preliminary treatment the deceased
was taken to Government Hospital Sirsaganj, where Dr. A. K. Garg (PW.1) treated him. 3.2 The
evidence of PW.1 shows that the deceased had sustained two injuries, which are as under:
“i. One stab wound measuring 1 cm x muscle deep, on the left side of stomach, 12 cm
away from Naval, in the position of 10 O’Clock. Angle acute. ii. One stab wound
measuring 2 cm x 1 cm x cavity deep on the right side of the chest, 1½ cm from the
right nipple. Angle acute.” 3.3 Since the condition of the deceased was serious, he was
being taken for further treatment to S.N. Hospital, Agra.
However, before he could reach the hospital, he succumbed to the injuries.
4. The learned Trial Judge as well as the Division Bench of the High Court have concurrently relied
on the evidence of PWs.2, 3 and 4, being eye witnesses to the incident.
5. Shri Ravindra Singh, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant submits that the case of
the prosecution is full of lacunae. It is submitted that though the incident is alleged to have occurred
in the house of Pradeep Kumar (PW.2) and the deceased, the blood stains are not found there and
therefore the finding that the place of incident is at the residence of PW.2 and the deceased is not
sustainable. It is further submitted that the prosecution has also failed to prove any motive. It is
lastly submitted that the prosecution has falsely implicated the appellant.
6. Shri Vikas Bansal, learned counsel appearing for the respondent/State, on the contrary, submits
that the motive has clearly been established. He submits that the appellant had some friendly
relations with one girl, which fact was known to the deceased. He submits that the deceased had
teased the girl, and the appellant being angered by the said fact had proceeded to assault the
deceased.
7. The evidence of all the three eye witnesses would reveal that the appellant is said to have come to
the house of the deceased. Thereafter, he called the deceased out, and when the deceased came
downstairs, the witnesses heard the cries of the deceased. The witnesses then came downstairs and
saw that the appellant was assaulting the deceased. They caught hold of the appellant and handed
him over to the police.
8. It is thus clear that what has preceded the assault has not been witnessed by any of the witnesses.
Insofar as the motive as recorded by the learned Trial Judge is concerned, from the evidence of theAjai Kumar Chauhan vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 29 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/33319845/ 2

witnesses it is found that though some suggestions were given with regard to the said motive, the
eye witnesses have denied the same.
9. It is also to be noted that both the appellant and the deceased were young boys aged about 20-21
years at the time of the incident and were students pursuing B.Sc. From the evidence of the
witnesses, it could be seen that both of them were having cordial relations. The evidence would also
show that whenever the deceased had any difficulties regarding his studies, he would consult the
appellant.
10. From the evidence, as placed on record, it is difficult to come to a finding that the appellant had
come with a premeditated mind to kill the deceased. The possibility of an altercation taking place
between the appellant and the deceased for some reason and the appellant assaulting the deceased
in the heat of passion on account of a sudden fight, cannot be ruled out.
11. Based on the discussion above, we are of the view that the prosecution has failed to bring the case
within the meaning of Section 300 of the IPC. The possibility of the incident occurring in the spur of
the moment and the appellant assaulting the deceased on account of sudden provocation, due to a
sudden fight between them cannot be ruled out. We find that the appellant would be entitled to the
benefit of Exception 4 of Section 300 of the IPC. As such, the conviction of the appellant under Part
I of Section 304 IPC would meet the ends of justice.
12. The appeal is therefore partly allowed. The conviction of the appellant under Section 302 of the
IPC is altered to the one under Part-I of Section 304 of the IPC.
13. As the appellant has already served the sentence for eight and a half years and with remission it
amounts to a period of more than ten years, we find that the said sentence would sub-serve the ends
of justice.
14. The appellant is, therefore, directed to be released forthwith, if his detention is not required in
any other case.
15. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
..............................J. (B.R. GAVAI) ............................................J. (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)
…..............................J. (K. VINOD CHANDRAN) NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 29, 2025.Ajai Kumar Chauhan vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 29 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/33319845/ 3