Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
2025 INSC 384
                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1425 OF 2025
                                          (@SLP (CRL) NO. 13324 OF 2024)
                            AMIT KUMAR & ORS.                      .....APPELLANTS
                                                    VERSUS
                            UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                 …..RESPONDENTS
                                                J U D G M E N T
J. B. PARDIWALA & R. MAHADEVAN, JJ.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following parts:
INDEX A. FACTUAL MATRIX ........................................................................ 2 B.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS ............ 24 C. SUBMISSIONS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NOS. 2, 3, 4 AND 7 RESPECTIVELY
........................................................ 26 D. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE
RESPONDENT NO. 5 – IIT
DELHI........................................................................................ 30 E. ANALYSIS
....................................................................................... 41 i. Scope of Section 174 of the
CrPC .................................................. 44 ii. F.I.R. under Section 154 of the CrPC
............................................ 50 F. CONCLUSION
................................................................................ 68 G. NATIONAL TASK FORCE TO
ADDRESS THE MENTAL HEALTH CONCERNS OF STUDENTS AND PREVENT
THE COMMISSION OF SUICIDES IN HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
.............................................................................. 69Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 1

1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High Court of Delhi,
dated 30.01.2024, in Writ Petition Criminal No. 2945 of 2023 by which the High
Court rejected the writ application filed by the appellants herein declining to issue a
writ of mandamus to the Police for the purpose of registration of a First Information
Report (for short, “F.I.R.”) in connection with the commission of suicide by two
students - sons of the appellant no. 2 and appellant no. 3 herein respectively - while
they were studying at the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi (for short, “IIT,
Delhi”).
A. FACTUAL MATRIX
3. We propose to borrow the facts giving rise to this appeal straight from the
impugned judgment of the High Court. The same reads thus:
“1. The present petition under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India has
been filed by the petitioners with the following prayers:-
"a) to issue an appropriate writ, order or direction including a writ in the nature of
mandamus, thereby directing the police authorities or Respondent No. 6 to register
appropriate FIRs in the cases involving the deaths of the sons of Petitioner No. 2 and
Petitioner No. 3; and
b) to issue an appropriate writ, order or direction including a writ in the nature of
mandamus, thereby directing the investigation of the cases to be done by Respondent
No. 6; and
c) to issue an appropriate writ, order or direction including a writ in the nature of
mandamus, thereby directing the Respondent No. 6 to conduct a thorough, impartial
investigation into the caste based atrocities being committed in the premises of
Respondent No. 5; and
d) monitor the investigation of the case; and
e) direct an independent inquiry into caste based atrocities being committed in the
premises of Respondent No. 5; and
f) to issue an appropriate writ, order or direction including a writ in the nature of
mandamus, thereby commanding the Respondents to ensure strict compliance and
implementation of provisions of SC/ST(POA)Act,1989 and rules and regulations
under the SC/ST(POA) Rules 1995.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 2

g) pass any other or further orders, as this Hon'b1e Court may deem fit and proper in
the circumstances of the present case."
2. In brief the facts of the case are that Complaints dated 26.07.2023 and 09.09.2023 were filed by
the petitioners who are the parents of two deceased students of B.Tech (Mathematics and
Computing) at Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, wherein, it was alleged that one student,
namely, Ayush Ashna was found dead on 08.07.2023 at his Hostel Room No. WH-02, Seventh
Floor, Udaigiri Hostel, IIT, New Delhi and another student, namely, Anil Kumar was found dead on
01.09.2023 in his Hostel Room No. EA-18, Ground Floor, Vidhyachal Hostel, IIT, New Delhi. It is
alleged in the complaints that they were murdered with the conspiracy of IIT Faculty members to
hide the real facts and both the students have been falsely shown to have committed suicide. It is
further alleged in the complaints that both the students belonged to Scheduled Castes and they had
informed their parents several times regarding caste discrimination by the faculty/staff of IIT, Delhi
and therefore, the petitioners alleged that the faculty members are trying to save the real accused
persons and the police officials are also not investigating the matter in a proper manner. In view of
the above said complaints, an enquiry was conducted in both the cases.
3. As per the Status Report filed by the Ld. ASC, postmortem of the deceased Ayush Ashna was
conducted vide PM No. 1500/23, wherein the cause of death was held to be "asphyxia as a result of
hanging due to ligature". During the course of enquiry, statements of father, brother, other relatives
and friends of the deceased were recorded in which it was found that the deceased had failed in
some of the subjects in the prior semester exams due to which he was under
depression. They further denied any foul play or any suspicion regarding the death of
deceased. Father of the deceased, namely, Ramesh Kumar had later given a written
complaint in the police station, in which he alleged that his son Ayush Ashna was
facing caste based discrimination by his hostel mates and other faculty members
during the beginning of his academic year 2019-2020 and he also suspected in the
complaint that his son could not have taken such steps and someone might have
killed his son with the connivance of faculty members. Therefore, to clarify the facts,
the grade reports of Ayush Ashna were collected from IIT and it was found that
during the 2nd semester of year 2022-23, he had failed in some of the subjects and
got lower grades i.e., Grade F which stands for Very Poor in 5 out of 7 subjects.
During further enquiry, several other students of IIT, Delhi who belonged to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes were also examined, wherein none of them
reported any caste-based discrimination against any of them.
4. In the case of Anil Kumar, postmortem of the deceased was conducted vide PM No. 2048/23
wherein the cause of death was held to be "asphyxia consequent to ante-mortem compression of
neck by ligature". During the course of enquiry, statements of the brother, mother, other relatives
and friends of the deceased were recorded who stated that due to scoring less marks in exams,
deceased was under stress. They further denied any foul play or any suspicion regarding the death of
deceased. Brother of the deceased, namely, Amit Kumar had later given a written complaint in the
police station, in which he alleged that Anil Kumar was facing caste- based discrimination by hisAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 3

teachers and other faculty members. He also suspected in the complaint that his brother could not
have taken such steps and someone might have killed him with the connivance of faculty members
and the faculty members are also trying to save the real accused persons. He further alleged in his
complaint that there was some kind of bleeding from the ears of the dead body and blood stains
were scattered all over the room and thus, the same does not appear to be an incident of suicide.
5. Accordingly, further enquiry was conducted in the case wherein it was found that Anil Kumar had
taken admission in IIT Delhi in 2019 vide Entry No. 2019 MT10674 in B.Tech (Mathematics and
Computing) and he was allotted Room No. SD-11, Vindhyachal Hostel at the time of admission.
During the semester period of 2020-21 and 2022-23, he got low grades in some of the subjects.
Deceased Anil Kumar extended his stay at the hostel for the preparation of remaining subjects and
completing the course and the same was granted by the relevant department immediately.
Subsequently, he was allotted Room No. EA-18, Vindhyachal Hostel. The deceased could not clear
some subjects and was residing in hostel on further six months extension. As per the rules, his
hostel was to be vacated in June but as he could not qualify some subjects, he was given extension
for six months to clear the exams.
6. On further verification of facts, it was revealed that the deceased passed all the subjects in 1st year
but he later failed in two subjects out of seven subjects in 3rd semester. Thereafter, in 4th semester
he took only one subject and failed in the same, in the following year (2021-22) he failed to pass any
subject, in 7th semester he failed in one subject out of six subjects and finally in 8th semester he
failed in two subjects out of six subjects and therefore, he was given an extension to clear all the
subjects. Furthermore, Hostel allotment letters were also analyzed and it was found that there was
no column revealing the category of the students as to whether she/he belongs to SC/ST/General
category in any of the form and only entry number was mentioned in all the forms and thus, no
evidence of caste-based discrimination against the deceased was found.”
4. Thus, it appears from the aforesaid that two young boys aspiring to be engineers were found dead
in their respective hostel rooms under suspicious circumstances. Ayush Ashna was found dead on
08.07.2023 in his hostel room No. WH-02 situated on the 7th Floor, Udaigiri Hostel, IIT, New
Delhi, whereas, Anil Kumar was found dead on 01.09.2023 in his hostel room No. EA-18 situated on
the Ground Floor of Vindhyanchal Hostel at IIT Delhi.
5. It appears from the materials on record that the father of Ayush Ashna lodged a complaint with
the Dy. Commissioner of Police, South-West District, New Delhi, dated 21.07.2023, which reads
thus:
                   “                                Seal-
                                        OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY
                                      COMMISSIONER OF POLICE
                                         SOUTH WEST DISTRICT
                                                 RECEIVED BY:
                                                  DHARAMPAL
                                              SIGNATURE : SD/
                                               Dated:26.07.2023Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 4

                                                   Dated: 21.07.2023
              To
              The DCP
              (South West District)
              Vasant Vihar, New Delhi-l10067
Subject: Complaint against the death of Ayush Ashna s/o Ramesh Kumar, student of 4th year
B.Tech.(Mathematics and Computing) IIT, Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi- 110016.
1. The complainant is the unfortunate father of the deceased son Ayush Ashna, student of 4th year B.
Tech, (Mathematics and Computing) BT, Delhi residing at his room No. WH-02, Udaigiri Hostel,
IIT Delhi-110016 and with heavy heart I am formally filing a complaint regarding the tragic death of
my beloved son, Ayush Ashna, on midnight of 8th July, 2023 and I believe there circumstances
surrounding his death that warrant a thorough investigation by your esteemed department and my
son, Ayush Ashna was a 21 year old student who had a bright future ahead of him. His sudden and
unnatural death has left us devastated and searching for answers.
While I recognize that all of sudden and untimely and unnatural deaths have external causes and I
have also reason to believe that there may have been factors contributing to his untimely and
unnatural deaths, and I implore you to investigate the matter impartially and thoroughly and I seek
a comprehensive investigation into the events leading up to our son's untimely and unnatural death.
2. That my deceased son Ayush Ashna was a brilliant student from his school days, and in his first
attempt he had cracked the prestigious JEE-Advanced 2019 exam and on the basis All India Rank in
SC Category qualified to be admitted in First year of B. Tech. (Chemical Engineering) in IIT, Delhi in
the academic year 2019 as this was proud moment for parents and relatives as their elder son also
passed out from IIT, Delhi by completing B. Tech. (Civil Engineering) in the same year.
3. That my deceased son, since beginning of the academic year 2019-20 started facing caste based
discrimination by his hostel mates and other faculty members however the complainant advised the
deceased son to focus on his study only and over the time the all things will come in order.
4. That my deceased son Ayush Ashna was full of life and he always remained in touch with his
mother and his elder brother as both residing in Delhi and with some close relatives who are also
residing in Delhi.
5. That my son changed his department from B.Tech (Chemical Engineering) to Department of
Mathematics and Computing which clearly demonstrate that my son was doing well in study and
might have a bright future ahead.
6. That he had changed his hostel residence from Jwalamukhi Hostel to Udaigiri Hostel after his
category was disclosed in a published branch change list. He told that he noticed a change in his
friends behaviour as they grew distant and rarely talked to him.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 5

7. That after COVID-19 restrictions were lifted and all students were allowed back to their respective
hostel so as my deceased son Ayush Ashna took, residence in Udaigiri Hostel, IIT Campus, Delhi
and was doing well and in his study.
8. That during his final year at B. Tech., he had not performed well in some papers and thereafter he
decided to stay in same Hostel for further studies and also registered in a summer course conducted
by Mathematics and Computing in this regard.
9. That it is pertinent to mention that, 1st July, 2023 was my deceased son's 20th birthday and was
greeted by his mother and brother and other near and dears and on phone he also discussed with his
elder brother about further studies and other future prospect.
10. That on 5th July 2023 his elder brother and his mother called on his phone many times but no
response was received and at night of 5th July 2023 the elder son and my wife alongwith her brother
went to Udaigiri Hostel where the family of the deceased kept at dark for an hour and later on it was
disclosed by the IIT Hostel authorities to his family present at hostel on the night of 8/9 July 2023
that the my son was left this material world by hanging himself.
11. That after hearing this tragic and devastating news my elder son and my wife alongwith her
brother lost conscious and went into unconscious stage as it was very hard to believe that how my
young son of age of 21 years can take such extreme step as he had yesterday celebrated birthday.
12. That as it was so informed, by my wife and my elder son and my brother-in-law present at that
time that the deceased son Ayush was found hanging, from his study desk with his knees resting on
a small trolley bag and by looking the body its seems that someone murdered my son and tied rope
and wires around his neck which was attached to leg of his of four feet study table, later on some
crime team arrived and took some photographs of the crime scene.
13. That was informed by my wife and my elder son and my brother-in-law (mama of deceased
Ayush Ashna) it is also pertinent to mention here that by instant appearance of sitting posture of
body has been hanged by someone else as there may not be sufficient pressure on neck in sitting
posture of person and when height of body is more than 5.8 feet.
14. That the IIT Delhi administration since beginning of the present tragic incident.
15. That it is highly improbable that my son can hang himself from with the table with the height of
around four feet as my son was around 5.8 feet tall and weighed around 75-80 kg. as it is also
important to mention here that during the periods of last four years with his stay in IIT Delhi not a
single person complained against him about anything.
16. That IIT, Delhi as an educational institution, it is of utmost importance to prioritize the
well-being of students specially hailed from marginalized society. The loss of my deceased son
Ayush Ashna is not just an isolated incident but a reflection of potential systemic deficiencies in the
support and resources available to students facing caste based discrimination and harassment I feelAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 6

compelled to bring the issue to your attention.
17. That Conduct a thorough investigation into the circumstances leading to untimely and unnatural
death of my son Ayush Ashna and assess whether any deliberate negligence or oversight contributed
to this tragedy.
18. That the biased attitude of IIT Delhi is also neglecting in the conduct of the IIT Delhi
administration as on the fateful night, the concerned person IIT Delhi prevented, the mother,
brother and mama (maternal uncle) to follow the ambulance upto the Safdarjung Hospital and
confined the aforesaid person into IIT guest house and on 9th July 2023 ambulance booked by the
person concerned present at mortuary, Safdarjung Hospital broke down midway and adding insult
to injury replacement ambulance arrived without equipped with freezer resultant body decomposed
rapidly and according the complainant was forced by circumstances to perform last rites in the
honour of departed soul during midnight.
19. That the till date no FIR, has been registered against the person/s responsible for tragic demise
of my son Ayush.
20. That, the IIT Delhi administration is in process of suppressing vital information and playing
down the tragic demise of my son Ayush and treating it as an another suicide case of due to study
stress. And not even considering the possibility of murdering of the student of the marginalized
society.
21. That as a grieving parents, we understand that this investigation cannot bring our son back, but
we hope that it may shed light on the circumstances surrounding his untimely and unnatural death
of my son Ayush and further under the facts and circumstances as explained herein above, you are
kindly requested to order for registration of FIR against the person involved in this well planned of
our beloved young son Ayush Ashna and thorough and impartial investigation be made into the case
against the person responsible for doing such heinous crime.
22. That it is my sincere hope that your esteemed department will take this complaint seriously and
act promptly to do justice. By doing so, the esteemed department can demonstrate its commitment
to the well- being of its students hailed from marginalized society and create a supportive
environment that fosters growth and resilience.
Sd/-
(Ramesh Kumar) Father of deceased son Ayush Ashna R/o Plot No. 26, Lane No. 8, Rameshwaram
Colony, Sacred Heart School Bareiily-243122 M. No. 9068401586.”
6. In the same manner, on 09.09.2023, the elder brother of Anil Kumar lodged a complaint in
writing with the Station House Officer, Kishangarh, New Delhi which reads thus:Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 7

“Dated: 09.09.2023 To, Station House Officer Kishangarh, New Delhi Subject:
Regarding the fearless murder of my younger brother Anil Kumar, S/o Suresh Kumar
- Village Anosa, District Banda, Uttar Pradesh. In connection with the brutal murder
due to racial hatred at IIT Delhi, Sir, I, Amit Kumar S/o Suresh Kumar, Village Anosa
District Banda, Uttar Pradesh. Date 01.09.2023 in 7:25 I received call from someone
who is saying I am professor, Aditya Mittal, who are of you Anil Kumar? I told him I
am his elder brother. Then he said that Anil Kumar has committed suicide. After that
I received lots of call from different phone numbers.
Between the calls a college security officer named Balram Yadav also Call me (mob
no. 9650612090) and told me that Anil Kumar committed suicide. Then around
10:30 PM Mobile No.991632959, 1 got call saying that I am calling from Kishangarh
IIT Delhi Anil Kumar committed suicide come to Delhi. I with my brother Aashis
Kumar, brother in law Vimal Kumar, brother in law Vinod Kumar, mother Vidya
Devi, wife Sunaina devi left for Delhi.
On Dated 2-9-23 approx 7:30 AM we reached to Delhi. We called the same mobile
number of Kishangarh police station and said, we have reached to Delhi but we are
not able to find the way to the police station, you come and take us. Police said, you
come yourself, we cannot come, we can send you the location. I said I don't
understand. But police did not come to us.
After that I called Balram Yadav stating that I don' t know the way to the College,
please send someone to pick me up. So they sent two guards who took us to the
college guest house and did not give us any information for the next 2 hours. On our
continued request, we were taken to Anil Kumar's hostel Vindhyanchal. Where the
gate was locked. When we asked the college to open the lock, they said that the key is
with the police.
Then someone told that there is a window, it will be visible from there, when I looked
through the window, there was a lot of blood on the table and floor in the room.
There were some other things lying in the room. We took videos and photos, then
after seeing all this I said that my brother was murdered because of caste hatred. This
is not suicide, my brother cannot commit suicide. He knew very well the situation at
home and the circumstances how were we teaching him. On 27-08-23 I sent Anil
Kumar 15,000/- money for buying new mobile phone. On 29-08- 23 he called me
and told me that the mobile is working well. Then I asked him, is there anything like
that? So he told me that sometimes inappropriate case based words are used by the
teacher. Then I called 9971632959, which is SI Dharmendra ji's mobile number, I
told him that my brother was murdered, he is not commit suicide. Our family
members were deeply shocked by Anil's murder.
SI Dharmendra ji asked me to come Kishangarh police station, I again said, I do not know the way to
Kishangarh police station.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 8

Then he said that you have to come here. At around 11:00 a.m., Balram Yadav or some other people
brought us to Kishangarh police station. At the police station, SI Dharmendra ji showed the video on
mobile and laptop, I watched the video and told SI Dharmendra ji that this was not suicide but
murder due to caste hatred. But he did not agree and kept saying again and again that it was suicide
not murder. Then he introduced us to SHO Sir. SHO Sir said that his marks were low and he had
failed in one subject, due to which he committed suicide. We said, again because of caste hatred Anil
was murdered. We have come from his college, professor Simon a madam who was his professor
told us that Anil was very good in, studies, his marks never go down, nor can he commit suicide still
police officials said it was suicide, not murder. Then we were made, to sign many papers and at
around 12:10 pm, the police took us to ACT Yadav Sir of Sarojini Nagar police station, he also told us
that Anil Kumar had committed suicide because his number was low then. I told him that 1 had
talked to Anil Kumar on 29-08-23, he had told that sometimes, inappropriate case based words are
used by the teacher otherwise everything is OK. Sir, he has been murdered. We demand CBI
investigation for my brother at approx 12:40 pm police officer take us to Safdarjung hospital. Were
got a lot of papers signed at the police station in the hospital. When the media persons tried to talk
to us in. the hospital, the police told us that we cannot talk to the media. We kept requesting the
police to show the body of Anil Kumar for 2 hours, but the police refused. Then before the post
mortem at 2:40 pm they took me, Vinod Kumar and Aashis to see the body. When we saw the body
of Anil Kumar, there was red coloured cloth on the neck, we tried to remove the cloth the police or
the doctor told us that the cloth could not be removed or nor we touch the body. Anil was murdered
because of ruthless caste hatred, despite our repeated requests for the reason of asking the police did
not remove the cloth and said that a video is being made, you can watch it. Blood was coming out
from the ears of Anil Kumar and there was a lot of smell from the body, then we came out, after the
post mortem we asked the police to show the CCTV camera of the college and Anil Kumar’s room.
The police showed the video of 10 or 15 minutes, after that they told us this will take time don't
waste time. I. asked the police office to give us the CCTV videos or to record the videos The
policeman kept our phones, safe in his car and said that we could not make videos. Then we were
taken to Anil Kumar's room. There was a lot of blood and other things lying on the table or floor of
the room. Then, I told to the police that how could this much of blood come from hanging. This is a
murder committed due to caste hatred. Then we took the body from, the hospital and came to the
Banda and after coming to Muktidhaam we opened the body and saw that there was soot on his
mouth, hand and foot. We did videos and photos and on 03-09-2023 at 9:45 am Ani’s last rites were
performed then I remembered ones when Anil Kumar comes to home in may on vacation. Then he
told me that, by the some of the college teacher always used caste indicative word and they said that
'how did you came here, you don't have right to study, this is not for you guys.' I called SI
Dharmendra ji three four times, but he did not pick up my call. Then I called later to asking when
will the PM report come, he said that it will be received after 15 days, then I said why is it getting so
late, he said, this is what happens. Just like my brother Anil Kumar was murdered on the basis of
caste hatred. Similarly, something similar happened with Ayush student of the same department.
And I have come to my knowledge that SC caste students are treated very badly in IIT Delhi.
I request you Sir that my brother Anil Kumar has been murdered because of Caste Hatred. So
register a case against culprits and take legal action. I want justice.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 9

Sd/-
Amit Kumar Applicant Dated 09.09.2023.”
7. The record further reveals that a letter was addressed by an Advocate named Mahmood Pracha of
New Delhi to the Chief Secretary, Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi on 13.09.2023,
seeking directions to the Delhi Police to register the F.I.R. in connection with the suspicious deaths
of the two students referred to above. The letter reads thus:
“Dated 13th September 2023 To The Chief Secretary Government of National Capital
Region of Delhi Delhi Secretariat, IP Estate, New Delhi -110002 Subject: Request for
directions to Delhi Police for registering FIR and effective and proper
implementation of provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code and provisions under
the Schedule Caste and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act and Rules
made thereunder- Regarding-
Dear Sir, I am constrained to inform you about the caste- based atrocities that were
committed on the members of the following families belonging to the Scheduled
Caste community due to which they have lost their sons who were studying at Indian
Institute of Technology New Delhi.
The members of both the families have exercised their rights- under Section 15-A(12)
of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act 1989
(Hereinafter referred to as "SC/ST(POA) ACT" and Rule 4(5) of the Scheduled Caste
and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Rules, 1995 (Hereafter referred to as
SC/ST (POA) Rules), which provide that the atrocity victims have the right to take
assistance from NGOs, social workers or Advocates, and have sought my assistance as
an Advocate to pursue their ease as they are facing continuous hardships, and further
atrocities, from the erring Government/police officials in the murder of both the
victims/deceased namely Mr Anil Kumar s/o late Shri Suresh Kumar resident of
Banda District of Uttar Pradesh, and Mr. Ayush Ashna s/o Mr. Ramesh Kumar,
resident of Bareilly, U.P. Pursuant to their request for assistance under Section
15-A(12) "SC/ST (POA) Act" and Rule 4(5) "SC/ST (POA) Rules"), I have met the
members of both families of the victims/deceased, namely Anil Kumar s/o late Shri
Suresh Kumar resident of Banda District of Uttar Pradesh, and Mr. Ayush Ashna s/o
Mr. Ramesh Kumar resident of Bareilly, U.P. After the meetings based on the
information given to me by them, which clearly shows gross culpability on part of
police, teachers, professors, other officials, and some of unknown students in these
cases, in helping the accused to escape the lawful punishment, I am compelled to
inform you that there has been a flagrant violation/disobedience of most of the
mandatory provisions of the SC/ST (POA) Act by various officials.
The brief facts of both the matters are given below which are elaborated in the
respective complaints.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 10

a) Mr. Amit Kumar S/O late Shri Suresh Kumar, a resident of Village Anousa, Distt.
Banda Uttar Pradesh presently residing at New Delhi has filed a complaint with SHO
Kishan Garh New Delhi vide DD No. 71A dated 9th September 2023 and also with the
office of Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) on 11/09/2023 vide diary No 11416
regarding gruesome and brutal murder of his younger brother, Mr. Anil Kumar,
under mysterious circumstances due to caste related atrocities and discrimination
committed on 01.09.2023 upon him in the premises of Indian Institute of
Technology, Delhi, wherein he was studying. A copy of the said complaint is attached
herewith as Annexure-I.
b) Another complaint filed by Mr. Ramesh Kumar, a resident of Rameshwar Colony,
Bareilly with the Office of Deputy Commissioner of Police (South West), Vasant Vihar
New Delhi on 26.07.2023 vide diary No. 9584 regarding gruesome and brutal murder
of his son Mr. Ayush Ashna again tinder mysterious circumstances, due to caste
related atrocities committed upon him and caste based discrimination in the
premises of IIT, Delhi, who was studying there and residing in Udaigiri Hostel of
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi. A copy of the said complaint is also
attached herewith as Annexure-II.
Needless to say that both the families are devastated by unnatural and mysterious death of victims
(deceased persons) and they are running from pillar to posts for the justice so that guilty are
punished. However, the Police have not registered any FIR in either case so far.
In this regard, the following submissions are made for your kind perusal and immediate action.
1. That in both the cases, there are serious allegations of gruesome murder of their sons, who were
otherwise quite academically brilliant, due to cast based, atrocities and discrimination in the IIT
Delhi.
2. That under the provisions of SC/ST(POA) Act, 1989, it is mandatory to lodge an FIR without any
preliminary enquiry or investigation, as mandated under section 18 A of the Act.
3. That Rule 5 of the SC/ST (PoA) Rules, 1995 also provides that every information relating to the
commission of an offence under the Act, if given orally to an officer in-charge of a police station,
shall, be reduced to writing by him or under his direction, and be read over to the informant, and
every such information, whether given in writing, or reduced to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed
by the persons giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered m a book to be maintained by
that police station.
4. That the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, in Lalita Kumari vs State of UP has held that
"Registration of FIR is mandatory under Section 154 of the Code, if the information discloses
commission of a cognizable offence and no preliminary inquiry is permissible in such a situation".Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 11

5. That provisions under Section 4(2) of the SC/ST(POA) Act, 1989 provides for certain duties of
public servant referred to in sub-section (1) that includes -
a) to read out to an informant the information given orally and reduced to writing by
the officer in charge of the police station before taking the signature of the informant.
b) to register a complaint or a First Information Report under this Act and other
relevant provisions and to register it under appropriate sections of Act;
c) to furnish a copy of the information so recorded forthwith to the informant;
6. That any violations of the provisions under SC/ST(PoA) Act and dereliction of duty referred to in
sub section (2) by a public servant entails penal proceeding against such public servant.
7. That the section 15A of the said Act provides for the statutory duty and responsibility of the State
to make arrangements for the protection of various rights of the victims, their dependents as laid
down therein, and to ensure the implementation of such rights and entitlements of the victims, and
witnesses in accessing the justice.
8. That section 17 of the said Act casts an obligation upon the District Magistrate, or a
Sub-Divisional Magistrate, or any Executive Magistrate, or even any Police officer, to declare such
an area to be an area prone to atrocities where such atrocities are committed or likely to be
committed and take necessary preventive action.
9. That Section 21 provides that the State Government shall take such measures as may be necessary
for effective implementation of the Act.
10.That Rule 3 of the SC/ST(PoA) Rules, 1995, provides that State government shall take
precautionary and preventive measures with a view to prevent atrocities on the Scheduled Caste and
Scheduled Tribes including identification of the area where it has reason to believe that atrocity may
take place, constitution of a high power State-level committee, district and divisional level
committees, or such number of other committees as it may deem proper and necessary for assisting
the Government in implementation of the provisions of the Act, to set- up a vigilance and
monitoring committee to suggest effective measures to implement the provisions of the Act, etc.
11.That the provisions of other various Rules under the SC/ST(PoA) Rules, 1995 provide for the
obligations and duties on the State Government such as setting up of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes Protection Cell under Rules 8, Nomination of Nodal Officers under Rule 9 for
coordinating the functioning of the District Magistrates, and Superintendent of Police, or other
officers authorized by them, investigating officers and: other officers responsible for implementing
the provisions of the Act, Measures to be taken by the District Administration under Rule 12,
specific responsibility of the state Government under Ruie 14 to make necessary provisions in its
annual budget for providing relief and rehabilitation facilities to the victims of atrocity, to frame
contingency Plan under Rule 15 for implementing the provisions of the Act and notify the same inAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 12

the: Official Gazette of the State Government, Constitution of State Level high power Vigilance and
Monitoring Committee under Rule 16, District level committee under Rule 17 and Sub Divisional
Level under Rule 17A, to review the implementation of provisions of the Act, relief and rehabilitation
facilities provided to the victims, and other matters connected therewith, prosecution of cases under
the Act, role of different officers/agencies responsible for implementing the provisions of the Act,
etc.
12.That despite the above provisions contained in said SC/ST (PoA) Act, 1989 and Rules made
thereunder, and directions issued by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Lalita Kumari vs State of
UP, police have not yet registered FIR in both the matters in respect of above mentioned complaints
cases, and hence flouted all the provisions of the said Act and Rules made thereunder, but also the
provisions of Criminal Procedure Code.
In view of the above circumstances, and fact of the above-mentioned cases, you are humbly
requested to kindly issue necessary directions to the Police to lodge FIR in both the cases at tile
earliest and provide the copy of the same to the complainants. You are also requested to kindly order
for immediate compliance of all the above-named provisions of the SC/ST (POA) Act, 1989 and
SC/ST (POA) Rules, 1995 made thereunder by the concerned officials. You are also requested to take
immediate action under Section 4 of the SC/ST (POA) Act, 1989 against the concerned police
officials of concerned police station namely Kishan Garh, and concerned DCP office of Vasant Vihar
for not registering the FIR and deliberately changing the true version given by the, family members
of the deceased to help the erring police/government officials, and also action against other officials
for not undertaking their duties as per the mandate of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, who have till now disobeyed the above-mentioned mandatory
provisions of the SC/ST (POA) Act, 1989.
Thanking you Mehmood Pracha Advocate C-66, Second Floor Nizamuddin East New Delhi, 110013
Ph. No. 011-41404040”
8. The record reveals that all that was done by the Police was an inquiry under Section 174 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure (for short, “the CrPC”). At the end of the inquiry, the Police reached the
conclusion that the two students had committed suicide due to depression. In other words, the
Police closed the matter saying that the two students were unable to cope up with the pressure of
their respective studies and in such circumstances they both committed suicide in their respective
hostel rooms.
9. However, the fact remains that at no point of time the Police thought fit to register the F.I.R. in
accordance with the provisions of Section 154 of the CrPC and carry out the investigation in
accordance with law, more particularly when complaints were lodged - one by the father and
another by the brother of the two students prima facie disclosing commission of a cognizable
offence.
10. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellants herein preferred a writ petition before
the High Court of Delhi and prayed for issuing a writ of mandamus to the Police to register an F.I.R.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 13

and undertake the investigation.
11. The Delhi High Court declined to entertain the writ petition and rejected the same.
12. In such circumstances, the appellants are here before this Court with the present appeal.
B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
13. The appellants in their written submissions have stated thus:
“i. That the present Written Submissions are being filed by the Petitioners in terms of
the Order dated 07.01.2024 passed in the present SLP.
ii. That the Petitioners have filed the present SLP against the impugned Order dated
30.01.2024 passed by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi in Writ Petition (Criminal)
No. 2945 of 2023, whereby the Writ Petition filed, inter alia, by the Petitioners for
registration of FIRs in respect of the death of two students of the IIT Delhi, i.e. the
respective sons of the Petitioners No. 2 and 3, was dismissed.
iii. That despite categorical Complaints (Annexure P-1 @ page 56 of the SLP and
Annexure P-2 @ page 63 of the SLP) given by the Petitioners, which disclosed several
cognizable offences, the Police had failed to register the FIRs. The Police had merely
conducted an eyewash inquiry as part of the inquest proceedings, and had recorded
false statements attributed to the Petitioners and their family members (Please refer
to Paragraph 10 of the Counter Affidavit, and respective Paragraph Wise Rejoinders
filed by the Petitioners) in order to present a case of suicide of the deceased students.
It is submitted that the Petitioners No. 1 and 2 had stated in their Complaint itself
(Annexure P-2) that they had been asked to sign on several papers without being
informed about their nature.
iv. That the Petitioners had filed the Writ Petition before the Hon’ble High Court on account of the
extremely biased and prejudicial conduct on part of the concerned Police officials, who had
categorically stated that they would not register an FIR under any circumstances, and would be
willing to face any consequences (Please refer to Paragraph 13 of the original Writ Petition Annexure
P-4 @ page 96 of the SLP). The Petitioners had also, inter alia, sought a CBI investigation before the
Hon’ble High Court, and monitoring of such investigation. As such, in these circumstances, an
application under Section 156(3) of the CrPC was not an efficacious remedy for the Petitioners.
v. That it is further submitted that the Hon’ble High Court had failed to appreciate that even if the
case of the Police is taken at its face value, and it is assumed that the students died due to suicide, it
is still incumbent on the Police to register the FIRs on the Complaints made to it, and investigate the
abetment of such possible suicide within the campus of the IIT Delhi.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 14

vi. That it is submitted that the IIT Delhi Administration had failed to put forth its case before the
Hon’ble High Court, and has failed to even appear before this Hon’ble Court despite service, to
present its version of events, and its stand. There has been no manner of support or assistance by
the IIT Delhi Administration for the parents and the family members of the deceased students. It is
submitted that such oblivious and disinterested conduct on part of the IIT Delhi Administration,
towards a case involving the death of its two students within its campus in a span of less than two
months, further strengthens the case of the Petitioners that an investigation is necessary into these
deaths.
vii. That it is submitted that the Police has, for the first time before this Hon’ble Court, placed on
record the Post Mortem Reports of the deceased students and the purported statements recorded
during the inquest proceedings, including those stated to have been given by the Petitioners and
their family members. It is submitted that the statements attributed to the Petitioners and their
family members are doctored and false, which is besides the fact that the Hon’ble High Court had
failed to call for these documents from the Police, and had simply relied upon a concocted Status
Report, contents whereof had been categorically rebutted by the Petitioners.
viii. That it is settled law that at the stage of registration of FIR, the Police has to simply consider
whether a cognizable offence is made out or not, from the information/complaint. It is submitted
that in violation of the settled proposition of law, and in complete derogation of the procedure
prescribed by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (as was then applicable), and Section 18A of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, the Police has
conducted a detailed inquiry without registering an FIR for the sole purpose of substantiating a
predetermined conclusion, i.e., that the deceased students had committed suicide due to academic
pressure. It is submitted that the record itself reflects that the deaths of these students require
detailed and thorough investigations, which cannot be initiated, let alone concluded, without
registration of FIRs.
ix. That hence, it is submitted that this Hon’ble Court may kindly be pleased to issue necessary
directions for registration of the FIRs into the deaths of the deceased students, investigation by the
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), and may kindly be pleased to monitor the investigation.” C.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NOS.
2, 3, 4 AND 7 RESPECTIVELY
14. The respondent nos. 2, 3, 4 and 7 in their written submissions have stated thus:
“1. Names of deceased:
(i) Ayush (death on 08.07.2023)
(ii) Anil (death on 01.09.2023)Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 15

2. Complaints dated 28.07.2023 & 9.9.2023 were lodged before Police by parents of
deceased alleging caste-based discrimination in the hostel and that they have been
murdered.
3. Then WP (Crl.) No. 2945 of 2023 was filed before the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi
praying for direction to register FIR and an independent inquiry in caste-based
atrocities.
4. In view of the above said complaints, it submitted that a fair enquiry was
conducted under Section 174 CrPC in both the cases which is as follows:
A. IN CASE OF DECEASED AYUSH ASHNA i. On 8.7.2023: Upon receiving a PCR
call regarding suicide of a student in Udayagiri Hostel, IIT Delhi, police officials
reached the spot i.e. Room No. WH-02 7th floor, Udayagiri Hostel, IIT, New Delhi.
In the presence of IIT staff, mother, brother of deceased and maternal uncle of deceased, the door of
the room which was locked from inside was broken wherein it waw found that Ayush was found
hanging.
Post Mortem Report (R-1 @pg. 11-13) : Death is due to asphyxia as a result of hanging due to
ligature. However, viscera has been preserved to rule out any concomitant poisoning/intoxication.
ii. Annexure R-3 @ pg. 17-42 During the course of enquiry, statements of Father, Brother and other
relatives/friends of the deceased was recorded in which it was found that Ayush Ashna had failed in
some of the subjects in prior semester exams due to which he was under depression and because of
that he might have taken this extreme step. They further denied any foul play or any suspicion
regarding the death of Ayush.
a. Ramesh (Father of Ayush): Ayush took this step under depression. He does not have any doubt on
death of his son. b. Rahul (Brother of Ayush): I am also IIT Delhi pas out. Ayush was under
depression due to failing. The hostel door was broken in front of us.
Ayush had committed suicide on table by plastic rope and extension wire. There is only one way
entry and exit to the room of my brother, which was locked from inside. I do not have any doubt on
death of my brother.
c. Sushma (Mother of Ayush): He was not picking calls since morning of 8.7.2023. He was in tension
due to failing in one or two subjects, room as broken in front of us, I do not have any doubt on death
of my son.
d. Praveen (Professor and in charge SC/ST Cell: since his appointment in SC/ST cell, he never
received any complaint of caste based discrimination from Anil and Ayush. e. Geratony Abhishek
(student): Both Late Anil Kumar and Ayush were students of my class. I am also studying in
extended period and both students were also studying in extended period. He had received one
WhatsApp message from Ayush regarding his one semester due. There was no caste basedAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 16

discrimination with the deceased. I also belong to SC caste but there was never any caste based
misbehaviour with me and there is no partition on caste basis.
f. Kaushal Verma (student): Being from SC category I have never faced any caste based remarks.
g. Pritish (student): Late Anil and Ayush were also studying in extended period. There is no
discrimination on caste basis. I am also from SC and there has never been any misbehaviour.
iii. Annexure R 4@pg. 43 Grade reports of Ayush Ashna were collected from the IIT and it was
found that during the 2nd semester period of year 2022-2023, he had failed in some of the subjects
and got lower grades (Grade F, in 5 out of 7 subjects which stands for Very Poor.
B. IN CASE OF DECEASED ANIL KUMAR i. It is submitted that on dated 1.9.2023, a PCR call was
received regarding suicide of student in Vindhayachal Hostel, IIT Delhi. On reach the spot i.e. Room
No. EA -18, Ground Floor, Vindhayachal Hostel, IIT, New Delhi, it was found that the same was
locked and smell was coming from inside. Accordingly, in the presence of IIT staff members and the
police, the door of the room was broken. Anil was found hanging from the ceiling fan of his room
with the help of bedsheet and towel. The body was in a decomposed state.
Post Mortem Report (R-2@pg 14-16):
“Death is due to asphyxia consequent to ante-mortem compression of neck by
ligature”.
Annexure R-3 @pg. 17-42:
Statements of brother Amit, mother, hostel staff and friends were taken who stated
that Anil was under depression due to less marks:
a. Amit (brother of Anil): Anil was student of 2019-2023 session, for 2 years he
stayed at home. On 30.8.2023, I talked with Anil and he was under depression due to
fail and less marks in exams. On 01.09.2023, I got a call from IIT that Anil has
hanged himself from a ceiling fan. I have no doubt but enquiry be done.
b. Vidya Devi (Mother of Anil): For 2 years he stayed at home due to lockdown, due
to less marks Anil was under depression, enquiry be done.
c. Naveen Kumar (student): Anil was my classmate and his room was near to my
room. His position in studies was not good. Anil never complained about caste
discrimination, and he always remained alone and did not talk with others. I have
never seen or heard any caste-based discrimination. d. Vaibhav Shivrani (student): I
am house secretary in Vindhyachal Hostel and my work is to forward the complaint
of students and there was never any issue of ST/SC with Anil. e. Anil Nawani
(Security Inspector): Guard of Vindhyachal Hostel called on 1.9.2023 that bad smellAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 17

is coming from room No. EA-18. The window was opened from behind of the room
and deceased was seen hanging from fan.
f. Kailash Meena (student of Room No. EA-17): Foul smell was coming and on
knocking room no. EA-18 there was no response and just below the door yellow
liquid was seen and flies were there, informed the guard.
ii. On 09.09.2023 Amit Kumar (Petitioner/brother of the deceased) gave a written
complaint in the police station, alleging caste-
based discrimination by his teachers and other faculty members and murder. He had
also alleged that there was some kind of bleeding from ears of the dead body and
blood stains were scattered all over the room which cannot be an incident of suicide.
iii. Accordingly, further enquiry was conducted. It was found there was no column
revealing the category of the student whether he/she belongs to SC/ST/General
category in any of the forms, only entry number was mentioned in all the forms.
Annexure R-4 @pg. 44: He failed in two subjects out of seven subjects in IIIrd
semester. In IVth semester he took only one subject and he failed in the same. In next
year (2021-2022) he did not pass any subject. In VIIth semester he failed in one
subject out of six. In VIIIth semester he failed in two subjects out of six subjects. He
was given an extension to complete his subjects.
5. In the Hostel allotment letters it was found that there was no column revealing the
category of the students as to whether she/he belongs to SC/ST/General category in
any of the form.
6. The Hon’ble High Court found that no complaint was ever given by any of the
deceased students to the police, SC/ST cell of IIT Delhi or to any of their friends
regarding caste-based discrimination and held that mandamus as prayed cannot be
issued in the present case.
7. That, during the course of enquiry, the allegations levelled could not be
corroborated and nothing came on record to substantiate the same.” D.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NO. 5 – IIT DELHI
15. IIT, Delhi in their written submissions have stated thus:
“1. That the present Special Leave Petition has been preferred against impugned Final
Order and Judgment dated 30.01.2024 passed by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi in
Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 2945 of 2023, whereby the Hon’ble High Court rightly
dismissed the Writ Petition as it was devoid of merits.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 18

2. Briefly stated that both Mr. Anil Kumar and Mr. Ayush Ashna were students of B.
Tech in the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi (hereinafter referred to as “IIT,
Delhi”) and that Petitioner no. 1 and Petitioner no. 2 are the brother and mother of
Anil Kumar and Petitioner No. 3 is the parent of Ayush Ashna.
3. That Mr. Ayush Ashna was found dead on 08.07.2023 at his Hostel Room No.
WH-02, Seventh Floor, Udaigiri Hostel, IIT, New Delhi and another student, namely,
Mr. Anil Kumar was found dead on 01.09.2023 in his Hostel Room No. EA-18,
Ground Floor, Vindhyachal Hostel, IIT, New Delhi.
4. It is pertinent to mention at this juncture that the death of both the students were
approximately two months apart and both the deaths cannot be interlinked to each
other in any way.
Brief facts surrounding the death of Mr. Ayush Ashna:
5. That on the night of 8th July 2023, at approximately 2300 hrs., Ayush Ashna's
mother called the reception of Udaigiri hostel and informed the guard on duty that
her son Ayush Ashna, resident of Room No. WH-02, was not answering his phone.
She also requested the guard to look for him.
6. Subsequently, the guard went to Room No. WH-02 and found that it was locked
from inside. The guard knocked several times, and on not receiving any response,
immediately reported the matter to the Security Control room as per protocol. The
Security team rushed to the hostel room and knocked, but there was still no response.
7. The Security staff then looked inside the room through the ventilator and saw what
appeared to be a non-moving body with the neck rolled to one side, hanged to an
inverted study table. The matter was immediately reported to Delhi Police and other
IIT Delhi authorities.
IIT Delhi authorities reached the hostel main gate within minutes and almost simultaneously and
independently, without having any further contact with the Answering Respondent, the student's
mother, brother, and maternal uncle also arrived at the hostel.
8. That while the Hostel warden was speaking with the student's parent/relatives, Delhi police PCR
also reached the hostel main gate. The situation was now under the charge of Delhi Police who took
over and reported the matter as per law.
9. It is submitted that at this juncture, everyone present, including the family was informed by the
Police of the tragedy. The Police took over the scene and initiated their official procedures. When the
family requested that they be allowed to go inside the room, the Police said that the Crime Branch
was on the way and asked them to wait for the Inquiry Officer (hereinafter referred to as “I.O.”) to
arrive at the spot.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 19

10. Thereafter, within another few minutes, the Police team from the Kishangarh Police Station
arrived. The police then broke open the room door following due procedure, and in the presence of
the family; inside a body was discovered and identified by the family as that of Ayush Ashna.
11. Two doctors from the IIT Delhi hospital confirmed the body to be lifeless. Subsequently, the
crime branch also arrived, took charge of the scene, and spoke with the family.
Post suicide information
12. The tragic news was a shock to all present. IIT Delhi personnel provided all possible assistance
during this challenging time and faithfully followed all instructions from the Police and Crime
Branch. All possible support for the family was ensured, including a medical doctor and a counsellor
was provided by IIT Delhi.
13. It is submitted that IIT Delhi is fully committed towards the safety and security of its students.
After receiving the telephone call from the student's mother, IIT Delhi security responded and acted
as swiftly as possible and informed the Delhi police immediately- all within 30 minutes of the initial
telephone call. Delhi police also arrived most promptly within minutes.
14. It is submitted that as per the postmortem report of the deceased Ayush Ashna, the cause of
death was held to be asphyxia as a result of hanging due to ligature.
15. Thereafter, an enquiry was conducted to understand the cause of death. During the course of
enquiry, statements of father, brother, other relatives and friends of the deceased were recorded in
which it was found that the deceased had failed in some of the subjects in the prior semester exams
due to which he was under
depression.
16. Consequently, the grade reports of Ayush Ashna were seen and it was found that during the 2nd
semester of year 2022-23, he had failed in some of the subjects and got lower grades i.e., Grade F
which stands for Very Poor in 5 out of 7 subjects.
17. It is pertinent to mention herein that no complaints regarding any caste-based discrimination
have been found and there is no record of any complaint being received from the deceased or any of
his family members since 2019-2020 by the College authorities. It is further pertinent to note that
during the enquiry, the relatives of the deceased denied any foul play or suspicion regarding the
death of the deceased.
18. Thereafter, father of the deceased, namely, Ramesh Kumar gave a written complaint to the police
station on 26.07.2023, wherein it was alleged that his son Ayush Ashna was facing caste-based
discrimination by his hostel mates and other faculty members during the beginning of his academic
year 2019-2020 and he also suspected in the complaint that his son could not have taken such steps
and someone might have killed his son with the connivance of faculty members.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 20

19. That IIT Delhi took due consideration to the complaint filed by the deceased student’s father and
therefore submitted a point-by-point response dated 14.08.2023 to the representation made by Mr.
Ramesh Kumar to clarify his doubts regarding his Complaints surrounding his son’s death.
Brief facts of case surrounding the death of Mr. Anil Kumar:
20. It is submitted that Anil Kumar had taken admission in IIT Delhi in 2019 in
B.Tech, Mathematics and Computing and he was allotted Room No. SD-11,
Vindhyachal Hostel at the time of admission. During the semester period of 2020-21
and 2022-23, he got low grades in some of the subjects.
21. That the deceased Anil Kumar extended his stay at the hostel for the preparation
of remaining subjects and completing the course and the same was granted by the
relevant department immediately. Subsequently, he was allotted Room No. EA-18,
Vindhyachal Hostel.
22. It is submitted that the deceased could not clear some subjects and was residing
in hostel on further six months extension. As per the rules, his hostel was to be
vacated in June but as he could not qualify some subjects, he was given extension for
six months to clear the exams.
23. It is submitted that the deceased passed all the subjects in 1st year but he later
failed in two subjects out of seven subjects in 3rd semester. Thereafter, in 4th
semester he took only one subject and failed in the same, in the following year
(2021-22) he failed to pass any subject, in 7th semester he failed in one subject out of
six subjects and finally in 8th semester he failed in two subjects out of six subjects
and therefore, he was given an extension to clear all the subjects. Therefore, in toto,
the deceased Anil Kumar was failing in two subjects out of seven subjects in 3rd
semester, in 4th semester he took only one subject and failed in the same, in the
following year he failed to pass any subject, in 7th semester he failed in one subject
out of six subjects and in 8th semester he failed in two subjects out of six subjects.
24. It is pertinent to note that the students are nowhere required to reveal the
category as to whether the students belong to SC/ST/General category. Hostel
allotment letters also prove that there was no column revealing the category of the
students in any of the form and only entry number was mentioned in all the forms
and thus, no evidence of caste-based discrimination against the deceased was found.
25. That on the evening of 1st September 2023, at around 5pm, a student residing in
one of the ground floor wings in Vindhyachal hostel reported a foul smell to the
hostel caretaker. Thereafter, it was found that the neighbouring room’s door was
locked from inside and glass panes of the grilled window facing the hostel basketball
court were also shut with the curtains drawn.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 21

26. Consequently, the warden and security were immediately called, who then
reached the hostel. The security unit pried open the window-pane from outside and
undrew the curtain. They discovered a hanging body.
Post suicide information
27. The security immediately called the police and the warden informed the Dean Student Affairs.
The Dean and Associate Dean reached Vindhyachal hostel within minutes. Three Counsellors were
also immediately called, and arrived within minutes, to talk to other residents of the hostel.
28. By approximately 06:10 PM, the police and fire department personnel arrived at the hostel,
followed by Crime branch. The Chief Medical Officer of IIT Delhi was also called, who immediately
arrived at the hostel. The police then took over the proceedings, the ACP arrived at approximately
07:10 PM and their fire personnel broke the door open at approximately 07:15 PM. The body was
identified as that of student Anil Kumar residing in the room as per records.
29. Immediately, upon identification of the body, IIT Delhi officials tried contacting the mobile
numbers of family, provided as per the student records. By approximately 1930 hrs., Mr. Amit
Kumar, elder brother of the student, could be contacted on the phone. He was informed of the tragic
loss and was requested to reach IIT Delhi at the earliest possible. Mr. Amit Kumar informed that
they had lost their father a few months ago, and at the present time the whole family was in their
village 600- 700 Km away from Delhi. They will try to reach by the morning of 2nd Sept. 2023.
30. Thereafter, Director, Dy. Director Operations, Registrar, Dy. Registrar Student Affairs also
reached the hostel. An ambulance was called and the police took custody of the body at
approximately 2050 hrs. for transporting to the Safdarjung hospital mortuary.
31. Thereafter, postmortem of the deceased was conducted vide PM No. 2048/23, wherein the cause
of death was held to be “asphyxia consequent to ante- mortem compression of neck by ligature”.
32. It is submitted that Mr. Amit Kumar, along with his family, reached IIT Delhi faculty guest
house by approximately 0730 hrs. on the morning of 2nd Sept. 2023. Warden, SC/ST Liaison
Officer, former SC/ST advisor, Head Counsellor, Director, Dean, Associate Dean met with the
family. On their request, family were taken to Vindhyachal hostel to look at the student's room from
outside.
33. During the course of enquiry, statements of the brother, mother, other relatives and friends of
the deceased were recorded who stated that due to scoring less marks in exams, deceased was under
stress.
34. It is pertinent to mention herein that the family and relatives of deceased further denied any foul
play or any suspicion regarding the death of the deceased.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 22

35. Academically, Anil Kumar had finished a little less than 50% of the 150 credits required for the
award of a BTech degree. He was identified as a student who was underperforming academically.
His advisor reached out to him; unfortunately, a meeting did not materialize.
36. Outside of academics, he had not approached the counselling unit for any assistance. In the first
week of June 2023, he had informed the hostel caretaker, while beginning his extended hostel stay,
that he had lost his father. Below is the hostel residence history of Mr. Anil Kumar (2019MT10674)
as per records:
(i) Pre-pandemic: Resident of Vindhyachal hostel from 15th July 2019 till vacating
due to pandemic.
(ii) Post-pandemic: Resident of Vindhyachal hostel from 19th April 2022 till current
date. After completion of applicable tenure of 8 semesters, the student requested
extension of stay for completion of remaining credits on 1st June 2023 (extension
request form was duly recommended and forwarded by Course Advisor and Head of
Department of Mathematics). Extension of stay was granted as per rules, either till
end of 1st Sem 2023-24 or 26th Dec.
2023 (whichever is earlier), on 2nd June 2023.
37. It was only on 09.09.2023, that Mr. Amit Kumar (brother of Anil Kumar) gave a written
Complaint in the Police station, wherein he alleged that Anil Kumar was facing caste-based
discrimination by his teachers and other faculty members. It is pertinent to bring to the notice of
this Hon’ble Court that this is the first time any such Complaint of caste-based discrimination was
being heard of from the deceased or his family.
Submissions:
38. That it is the policy of the institution that before the start of every semester, students who have
previously underperformed academically are identified. Then they are advised to take a slower pace
academic program to avoid overburdening. Their respective faculty advisors are notified as to their
deteriorating academic performance and are asked to contact their advisees for any help with the
scholastic pursuits. Thereafter, the faculty advisors contact the students, and on a regular basis
continue to contact, to discuss any issues that they might have with respect to their course and
graduation plans.
39. During the time relevant for the present case, the same procedure was followed and about 10%
of students were recommended for counselling sessions through this intervention, and a handful of
students were identified as requiring language support.
40. It is submitted that the institution takes every complaint regarding caste-based discrimination
with utmost seriousness and the apprehensions of the parents of the deceased were also duly
considered. In this regard, a thorough enquiry was conducted wherein statements of family andAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 23

friends of the deceased were recorded and several other students of IIT, Delhi who belonged to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes were also examined. During this enquiry, not even a single
assertion cropped up which suggested that the deceased students were murdered in the campus and
as a matter of fact, none of those students had ever reported any caste- based discrimination either
by any faculty members or anybody else within the institution.
41. It is also pertinent to mention herein that no complaint was ever given by either of the deceased
students to the Police or to the SC/ST Cell of IIT, Delhi regarding any caste-based discrimination.
Moreover, in order to mitigate the possibility of bigotry and discrimination amongst the students, it
is the policy of the institution that no person, except the Dean of Academics, is aware about the
category to which any student belongs and all students are treated equally in the campus by all the
staff members. It is further submitted that the students are not required to disclose their castes in
any other forms filled by them during their time at IIT Delhi.
42. That in order to bring forth the actual facts of the death of the deceased students, a detailed
enquiry was conducted, wherein all relevant materials were collected and subjected to rigorous
scrutiny. In the absence of any specific allegation or even an iota of evidence in the enquiry
suggesting any caste-based discrimination in the present case or that the deceased committed
suicide for any reason other than weary academic load, it is humbly submitted that there are no
grounds for either registration of FIR or directing CBI to investigate the matter in the present case
and the same deserves to be dismissed.
43. It is submitted that IIT Delhi is fully committed to the physical and mental well-being of all the
students, including those belonging to marginalized groups. It is the top priority of the answering
respondents to eradicate caste-based discrimination and/or any form of harassment from the
academic pursuits of its students. IIT Delhi makes conscious efforts to encourage, counsel and
motivate the students.
44. IIT Delhi has a zero-tolerance policy for any discrimination inflicted by any person in the
campus and stringent steps are taken to expunge such possibilities. The institution ensures that any
systemic deficiencies that can be identified are immediately addressed.
45. It is submitted that in order to aid the scholastic journey of the students at IIT Delhi, each
undergraduate student in the Institution is allotted a faculty advisor. This information is constantly
reflected on the institute academics portal, which is routinely accessed by each student for various
purposes, including fees payment and registration for courses. The advisors are also informed of
their advisees on their respective academics’ portal. Advisees can meet their advisor at any time to
discuss their issues.
46. Further, a Board of Student Welfare (BSW) has also been established at the Institute which
assists in ensuring student wellness and addressing mental health issues. In addition to being led by
an elected student General Secretary, this board is also mentored by several faculty members, with
the Associate Dean Student Welfare (ADSW) serving as the President of the Board. BSW reaches out
to students and regularly encourages them to come forward with any issue that they may face duringAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 24

their time at IIT Delhi.
47. Additionally, the Institution operates a separate Counselling Unit to aid mental tonicity of the
students. Currently, there are three female and one male counsellors in this Unit from diverse
backgrounds. Two counsellors (one female and one male) reside on campus and are available 24x7
on call. Four (04) more permanent counsellor positions have also been advertised and the hiring
process is underway. Services of an online counselling portal (Your Dost) are also made available to
all students 24x7.
48. The Institution also ensures that at least one contractual psychiatrist remains physically
available in the hospital at the campus from 0800- 2000 hrs. Mon-Fri and on-call for emergencies
on weekends. The process of hiring a permanent psychiatrist for the hospital is also underway.
49. In addition to the above steps, the following support systems are also operational at the Institute
level to promptly address the concerns of students and provide efficacious remedy to their
problems:
* ICC (Internal Complaints Committee) * Grievance Redressal Committee * Student
Grievance web portal * IGES (Initiative for Gender Equity and Sensitization) * Office
of Diversity & inclusion headed by a Dean * SC/ST Cell
50. It is submitted that IIT Delhi is also in the process of setting up a Central Attendance monitoring
system for all students, with special attention on the underperforming students.
51. It is submitted that IIT Delhi aims at providing a comfortable and a safe environment for its
students and emotions of their parents. In the case at hand as well, the Answering Respondents
have fully cooperated with the Police, parents and have even conducted internal inquiry to verify the
claims of the Petitioners.
52. However, in both the inquiries conducted by the Answering Respondents as well as the Police,
no cognizable offence has been made out.” E. ANALYSIS
16. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the High Court
committed any error in passing the impugned judgment and order.
17. It is not in dispute that the Police for some reason or the other declined to register an F.I.R. on
the ground that no one could be said to have abetted the commission of suicide. All that the Police
did in the course of the inquiry under Section 174 of the CrPC was to record the statements of other
students belonging to SC/ST category studying in IIT Delhi, who stated that there was no
caste-based discrimination in the hostel.
18. The High Court while rejecting the writ petition observed thus:Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 25

“14. Perusal of the Status Report filed by the Ld. ASG for the State shows that a
thorough and detailed enquiry was conducted into both the cases and it was found
that no complaint was ever given by any of the deceased students to the police, SC/ST
Cell IIT Delhi or to any of their friends in Campus regarding any caste based
discrimination being faced by them. Moreover, statements of family and friends of
the deceased were recorded and several other students of IIT, Delhi who belonged to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes were also examined and none of them
reported any caste-based discrimination taking place in the IIT Campus, Delhi. The
allegations levelled by the petitioners, therefore, could not be corroborated and
nothing came on record to substantiate the same.
15. Undoubtedly, the academic career of two brilliant and young students came to an
end under devastating circumstances and one cannot even fathom the challenges and
emotions which the parents of the deceased must be facing every day. This Court can
understand the sentiments of the parents of the deceased and deeply discourages the
growing trend of pressurising young minds to perform the best in every aspect of life
leading them to take unfortunate steps. It is high time that the faculty as well as other
staff members of Indian Institute of Technology make conscious efforts and take
endeavours to counsel, encourage, motivate and invigorate the students. It is of
utmost priority to make the young minds understand that scoring good marks and
performing your best is important but it is not the most important thing in life and
one can certainly give his/ her best without succumbing to the pressures or stress of
performing better. The most significant way of instilling this into young minds who
face challenges everyday in the professional and competitive environment of colleges
is by teaching them in the very same campus where they spend years of their students
life the values of prioritizing their health be it physical or mental which will also give
them the confidence to face every challenge in life.
16. Taking into consideration the totality of facts and-
circumstances of this case, this Court is of the view that a mandamus cannot be issued in a routine
manner merely on the basis of sympathy or sentiments, accordingly, the present petition along with
pending applications, if any is dismissed being devoid of any merits.” (Emphasis supplied)
19. This litigation is an eye-opener not just for the police but also for the parents whose children are
studying in different educational institutions, more particularly those students residing in a hostel
far from their respective homes, and also the management of the educational institutions across the
country.
20. The pivotal question that falls for our consideration is whether the Police was justified in closing
the matter upon conclusion of the inquiry under Section 174 of the CrPC? In other words, whether
recourse to inquest proceedings under Section 174 of the CrPC obviates the requirement of
registration of F.I.R.? To put it in a still lucid manner, whether an inquest report discovering the
cause of death would be good enough to close the matter without registration of an F.I.R.?Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 26

i. Scope of Section 174 of the CrPC
21. Section 174 of the CrPC reads as under:
“Section 174. Police to enquire and report on suicide, etc.
1) When the officer in charge of a police station or some other police officer specially empowered by
the State Government in that behalf receives information that a person has committed suicide, or
has been killed by another or by an animal or by machinery or by an accident, or has died under
circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that some other person has committed an offence, he
shall immediately give intimation thereof to the nearest Executive Magistrate empowered to hold
inquests, and, unless otherwise directed by any rule prescribed by the State Government, or by any
general or special order of the District or Sub-divisional Magistrate, shall proceed to the place where
the body of such deceased person is, and there, in the presence of two or more respectable
inhabitants of the neighbourhood, shall make an investigation, and draw up a report of the apparent
cause of death, describing such wounds, fractures, bruises, and other marks of injury as may be
found on the body, and stating in what manner, or by what weapon or instrument (if any); such
marks appear to have been inflicted.
(2) The report shall be signed by such police officer and other persons, or by so many of them as
concur therein, and shall be forthwith forwarded to the District Magistrate or the Sub-divisional
Magistrate. (3)When-
(i) the case involves suicide by a woman within seven years of her marriage; or
(ii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage in any circumstances
raising a reasonable suspicion that some other person committed an offence in relation to such
woman; or
(iii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage and any relative of
the woman has made a request in this behalf; or
(iv) there is any doubt regarding the cause of death; or
(v) the police officer for any other reason considers it expedient so to do, he shall, subject to such
rules as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, forward the body, with a view to its
being examined, to the nearest Civil Surgeon, or other qualified medical man appointed in this
behalf by the State Government, if the state of the weather and the distance admit of its being so
forwarded without risk of such putrefaction on the road as would render such examination useless.
(4) The following Magistrates are empowered to hold inquests, namely, any District Magistrate or
Sub- divisional Magistrate and any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by
the State Government or the District Magistrate.”Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 27

22. The proceedings under Section 174 of the CrPC should be kept more distinct from the
proceedings taken on the complaint. Investigation under Section 174 is limited in scope and is
confined to the ascertainment of the apparent cause of death and should not be equated with
investigation into cognizable offences under Sections 160 and 161 of the CrPC respectively. The
procedure under Section 174 of the CrPC is for the purpose of discovering the cause of death and the
evidence taken is very short. Sub-section (4) of Section 174 empowers any District Magistrate,
Sub-Divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by
the State Government or the District Magistrate to hold inquest. The inquest held by the magistrate
under Section 174 is distinct from an inquiry under Section 202.
23. The inquest proceedings are concerned with discovering whether in a given case the death was
accidental, suicidal, homicidal, or caused by an animal and in what manner or by what weapon or
instrument the injuries on the body appear to have been inflicted, therefore, the evidence taken is
very short. (See: Chaman Lal v. Emperor, AIR 1940 Lah 210, at 214)
24. The investigations conducted under Sections 154 and 174 of the CrPC respectively are distinct in
nature and purpose. A study of Chapter XII of the CrPC reveals that these two provisions cater to
different procedural objectives. The former begins with information about the commission of a
cognizable offence referred to in Section 154(1), culminating in registration of F.I.R. and ending with
filing of a chargesheet/challan before the competent court under Section 173 or a final report as the
case may be. This procedure to be undertaken for initiating an investigation into a cognizable
offence has been explained by this Court in Ashok Kumar Todi v. Kishwar Jahan, (2011) 3 SCC 758,
in the following words:
“48. Under the scheme of the Code, investigation commences with lodgement of
information relating to the commission of an offence. If it is a cognizable offence, the
officer in charge of the police station, to whom the information is supplied orally has
a statutory duty to reduce it to writing and get the signature of the informant. He
shall enter the substance of the information, whether given in writing or reduced to
writing as aforesaid, in a book prescribed by the State in that behalf. The
officer-in-charge has no escape from doing so if the offence mentioned therein is a
cognizable offence and whether or not such offence was committed within the limits
of that police station.[…]” (Emphasis supplied)
25. Further, the objective of proceedings under Section 154(1) has been succinctly
explained by this Court in Manoj Kumar Sharma v. State of Chhattisgarh, (2016) 9
SCC 1, as under:
“19. […] Whereas the starting point of the powers of the police was changed from the
power of the officer in charge of a police station to investigate into a cognizable
offence without the order of a Magistrate, to the reduction of the first information
regarding commission of a cognizable offence, whether received orally or in writing,
into writing. As such, the objective of such placement of provisions was clear which
was to ensure that the recording of the first information should be the starting pointAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 28

of any investigation by the police. The purpose of registering FIR is to set the
machinery of criminal investigation into motion, which culminates with filing of the
police report and only after registration of FIR, beginning of investigation in a case,
collection of evidence during investigation and formation of the final opinion is the
sequence which results in filing of a report under Section 173 of the Code. […]”
(Emphasis supplied)
26. In contrast, an investigation under Section 174 of the CrPC focuses on
ascertaining the apparent cause of death in cases of unnatural or suspicious deaths.
This position has been well explained by this Court in Pedda Narayana v. State of
Andhra Pradesh, (1975) 4 SCC 153. The proceeding under Section 174 is limited in
scope and fundamentally distinct from investigations aimed at prosecuting offences.
Inquest proceedings are conducted by the police or a Magistrate and conclude with
the filing of an inquest report before the Sub-Divisional Magistrate (SDM), District
Judge, or Magistrate as the case may be. The relevant observations are reproduced
herein below:
“11. A perusal of this provision would clearly show that the object of the proceedings
under Section 174 is merely to ascertain whether a person has died under suspicious
circumstances or an unnatural death and if so what is the apparent cause of the
death. The question regarding the details as to how the deceased was assaulted or
who assaulted him or under what circumstances he was assaulted appears to us to be
foreign to the ambit and scope of the proceedings under Section 174. In these
circumstances, therefore, neither in practice nor in law was it necessary for the police
to have mentioned these details in the inquest report. […]” (Emphasis supplied)
27. The investigation after registration of F.I.R. under Section 154 of the CrPC is an
investigation into an offence. In contrast, the investigation under Section 174 of the
CrPC is an investigation or an “inquiry” into the apparent cause of death.
28. The marginal note attached to Section 174 of the CrPC reads “Police to inquire
and report on suicide, etc.” This is self-explanatory as to the scope of the provision.
Sections 174 to 176 of the CrPC only contemplate inquiry into the cause of death.
Although the phrase ‘investigation’ is used in Section 174 of the CrPC, yet it is only an
investigation in the nature of an inquiry. Sometimes, during the inquest, the police
record the presence of witnesses who are also witnesses in the case. These statements
are not meant as substitutes for statements under Section 161 of the CrPC. The
inquest requirement under Section 174 does use the word investigation but if one
considers the entire phraseology of Section 174 of the CrPC, one comes to the
conclusion that the word investigation in Section
174 is not an investigation to find out who are the offenders. It is only to enable the police to come
up with the “apparent cause of death”. This phrase in Section 174 should give us the clue as to the
correct understanding of the role of the police in inquest panchnama.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 29

ii. F.I.R. under Section 154 of the CrPC
29. Section 154 of the CrPC lays down the procedure for the registration of a First Information
Report in cases of cognizable offenses. The relevant portion of the provision is reproduced
hereunder:
“154. Information in cognizable cases.—(1) Every information relating to the
commission of a cognizable offence, if given orally to an officer in charge of a police
station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction, and be read over to
the informant; and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to
writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the substance thereof
shall be entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the State
Government may prescribe in this behalf […]”
30. The object and purpose of filing an F.I.R. has been explained by this Court in Sheikh Hasib Alias
Tabarak v. State of Bihar, (1972) 4 SCC 773, observing that the main purpose of the F.I.R. is to
initiate the criminal justice process and to gather information about the alleged crime, enabling
them to take appropriate actions to identify and apprehend the offender. The Court held:
“4…The principal object of the first information report from the point of view of the
informant is to set the criminal law in motion and from the point of view of the
investigating authorities is to obtain information about the alleged criminal activity
so as to be able to take suitable steps for tracing and bringing to book the guilty party.
The first information report, we may point out, does not constitute substantive
evidence though its importance as conveying the earliest information regarding the
occurrence cannot be doubted. It can, however, only be used as a previous statement
for the purpose of either corroborating its maker under Section 157 of the Indian
Evidence Act or for contradicting him under Section 145 of that Act. It cannot be used
for the purpose of corroborating or contradicting other witnesses.” (Emphasis
supplied)
31. In Thulia Kali v. State of T.N., (1972) 3 SCC 393, this Court elucidated the impact of delay in
registration of F.I.R. The Court held as follows:
“12. … First information report in a criminal case is an extremely vital and valuable
piece of evidence for the purpose of corroborating the oral evidence adduced at the
trial. The importance of the above report can hardly be overestimated from the
standpoint of the accused. The object of insisting upon prompt lodging of the report
to the police in respect of commission of an offence is to obtain early information
regarding the circumstances in which the crime was committed, the names of the
actual culprits and the part played by them as well as the names of eyewitnesses
present at the scene of occurrence. Delay in lodging the first information report quite
often results in embellishment which is a creature of afterthought. On account of
delay, the report not only gets bereft of the advantage of spontaneity, danger creepsAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 30

in of the introduction of coloured version, exaggerated account or concocted”
(Emphasis supplied)
32. The point of law on mandatory registration, as interpreted from Section 154 of the CrPC, has
been elaborated by this Court in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335. Upon
thorough examination of the mandatory implications of Section 154 of the CrPC, this Court arrived
at the following finding in paragraphs 31 and 32 of the judgment:
“31. At the stage of registration of a crime or a case on the basis of the information
disclosing a cognizable offence in compliance with the mandate of Section 154(1) of
the Code, the police officer concerned cannot embark upon an enquiry as to whether
the information, laid by the informant is reliable and genuine or otherwise and refuse
to register a case on the ground that the information is not reliable or credible. On
the other hand, the officer in charge of a police station is statutorily obliged to
register a case and then to proceed with the investigation if he has reason to suspect
the commission of an offence which he is empowered under Section 156 of the Code
to investigate, subject to the proviso to Section 157. (As we have proposed to make a
detailed discussion about the power of a police officer in the field of investigation of a
cognizable offence within the ambit of Sections 156 and 157 of the Code in the
ensuing part of this judgment, we do not propose to deal with those sections in
extenso in the present context.) In case, an officer in charge of a police station refuses
to exercise the jurisdiction vested in him and to register a case on the information of
a cognizable offence reported and thereby violates the statutory duty cast upon him,
the person aggrieved by such refusal can send the substance of the information in
writing and by post to the Superintendent of Police concerned who if satisfied that
the information forwarded to him discloses a cognizable offence, should either
investigate the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer
subordinate to him in the manner provided by sub-section (3) of Section 154 of the
Code.
32. Be it noted that in Section 154(1) of the Code, the legislature in its collective
wisdom has carefully and cautiously used the expression ‘information’ without
qualifying the same as in Section 41(1)(a) or (g) of the Code wherein the expressions,
‘reasonable complaint’ and ‘credible information’ are used. Evidently, the non-
qualification of the word ‘information’ in Section 154(1) unlike in Section 41(1)(a) and (g) of the
Code may be for the reason that the police officer should not refuse to record an information
relating to the commission of a cognizable offence and to register a case thereon on the ground that
he is not satisfied with the reasonableness or credibility of the information. In other words,
‘reasonableness’ or ‘credibility’ of the said information is not a condition precedent for registration
of a case. A comparison of the present Section 154 with those of the earlier Codes will indicate that
the legislature had purposely thought it fit to employ only the word ‘information’ without qualifying
the said word. Section 139 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1861 (Act 25 of 1861) passed by the
Legislative Council of India read that ‘every complaint or information’ preferred to an officer inAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 31

charge of a police station should be reduced into writing which provision was subsequently modified
by Section 112 of the Code of 1872 (Act 10 of 1872) which thereafter read that ‘every complaint’
preferred to an officer in charge of a police station shall be reduced in writing. The word ‘complaint’
which occurred in previous two Codes of 1861 and 1872 was deleted and in that place the word
‘information’ was used in the Codes of 1882 and 1898 which word is now used in Sections 154, 155,
157 and 190(c) of the present Code of 1973 (Act 2 of 1974). An overall reading of all the Codes makes
it clear that the condition which is sine qua non for recording a first information report is that there
must be an information and that information must disclose a cognizable offence.
33. It is, therefore, manifestly clear that if any information disclosing a cognizable offence is laid
before an officer in charge of a police station satisfying the requirements of Section 154(1) of the
Code, the said police officer has no other option except to enter the substance thereof in the
prescribed form, that is to say, to register a case on the basis of such information.” (Emphasis
supplied)
33. In Lalita Kumari v. Government of U.P., (2014) 2 SCC 1, a five-
Judge Bench of this Court affirmed the requirement for the mandatory registration of an F.I.R.
under Section 154 of the CrPC.
The Court ruled that, once the information provided discloses the commission of a cognizable
offence, it is imperative for the police to register the F.I.R. without conducting any preliminary
inquiry. This judgment reinforces the principle that the registration of an F.I.R. is a duty that must
be carried out promptly upon the receipt of credible information regarding a cognizable crime. The
relevant paragraphs are reproduced hereinbelow:
“83. In terms of the language used in Section 154 of the Code, the police is
duty-bound to proceed to conduct investigation into a cognizable offence even
without receiving information (i.e. FIR) about commission of such an offence, if the
officer in charge of the police station otherwise suspects the commission of such an
offence. The legislative intent is therefore quite clear i.e. to ensure that every
cognizable offence is promptly investigated in accordance with law. This being the
legal position, there is no reason that there should be any discretion or option left
with the police to register or not to register an FIR when information is given about
the commission of a cognizable offence. Every cognizable offence must be
investigated promptly in accordance with law and all information provided under
Section 154 of the Code about the commission of a cognizable offence must be
registered as an FIR so as to initiate an offence. The requirement of Section 154 of the
Code is only that the report must disclose the commission of a cognizable offence and
that is sufficient to set the investigating machinery into action.” (Emphasis supplied)
34. The foregoing discussion leads us to the inevitable conclusion that when an informant
approaches the police with information regarding the commission of a cognizable offence, the police
owes a duty to promptly register an F.I.R. and initiate investigation in accordance with Section 154Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 32

of the CrPC. The police authorities are not vested with any discretion to conduct a preliminary
inquiry to assess the credibility of the information before registering the F.I.R. Any such practice
would be contrary to the established principles of criminal law.
35. Over a period of time, this Court through its legion of decisions, has emphasized the necessity of
ensuring the prompt registration of F.I.R. to uphold the rule of law and prevent any undue delay in
the commencement of criminal investigation. Timely registration of an F.I.R. not only ensures that
crucial evidence is preserved but also serves to protect the rights of victims by setting the criminal
justice process in motion without unnecessary procedural impediments.
36. In the present case, the appellants had approached the territorial police station on 21.07.2023
and 09.09.2023 respectively for registration of an F.I.R., alleging foul play and commission of
offence under the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
The appellant nos. 1 and 2 respectively, further, on 11.09.2023, addressed a detailed letter to the
Deputy Commissioner of Police, South-West, New Delhi for registration of F.I.R. However, no heed
was paid to the fervent appeal made by the appellants herein.
37. The husband of appellant no. 3 (father of Ayush Ashna) in his complaint, dated 21.07.2023
addressed to the D.C.P., Vasant Vihar, New Delhi, had informed the Police that his son, Ayush
Ashna, was facing caste-based harassment from his hostel inmates as well as the faculty members.
He further informed the Police that his son had to change his hostel owing to his caste category
being revealed in the branch change list. He, therefore, demanded an investigation into his son’s
untimely and unnatural death.
38. Appellant nos. 1 and 2 respectively in their complaint dated 09.09.2023, stated that the death of
Anil Kumar was not due to suicide, but was a result of murder based on caste hatred. They also
informed the Police that Anil Kumar was facing caste-based discrimination including the use of
derogatory caste-based words by the members of the faculty.
39. There is no doubt that the offence alleged by the appellants in their respective complaints
disclosed commission of cognizable offences.
40. It is altogether a different thing to say that there is no element of truth in what has been alleged
by the appellants in their respective complaints. It could just be a figment of their imagination. It
could also be just a reflection of their anger towards the management as two young boys lost their
lives. Even if the Police was of the view that there was no element of truth in what had been alleged
by the appellants, it could have said so only after registering an F.I.R. and conducting an
investigation pursuant thereto. We say so because this is the law. The Police could not have taken a
shortcut just because something happened in the hostel of an eminent educational institution like
IIT Delhi. It seems that the Police very quickly jumped to the conclusion that the two boys were in
some sort of depression as they were not doing well in their studies. Such conclusion of the Police
may as well be correct. However, again, at the cost of repetition, we say that such a conclusion could
have been arrived at only after following the due process of law, i.e., registration of an F.I.R. and
investigation. Nobody would have stopped the Police from filing an appropriate closure reportAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 33

saying that no case is made out. However, to close the entire matter after undertaking an
investigation under Section 174 of the CrPC is something which we do not approve of.
41. It is legitimate to argue that the commission of suicide is not a cognizable offence. A person who
commits suicide goes beyond the cognizance of police. What is cognizable in cases of suicide is the
abetment to commit suicide. Therefore, the complaint made by the complainant must disclose
abetment of commission of suicide by the person named therein before an F.I.R. can be registered.
42. Further, the offence alleged to have been committed under Section 3(1)(q) of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (“SC/ST (PoA) Act, 1989”) is a
cognizable offence under Section 18 of the said Act. The relevant provision reads thus:
“18-A. No enquiry or approval required. – (1) For the purposes of this Act,-
i. preliminary enquiry shall not be required for registration of a First Information Report against
any person; or ii. the investigating officer shall not require approval for the arrest, if necessary, of
any person, against whom an accusation of having committed an offence under this Act has been
made and no procedure other than that provided under this Act or the Code shall apply.”
43. The aforementioned provision, in the most unambiguous language, lays down that no
preliminary enquiry is required for the registration of an F.I.R. This leaves no room for the
authorities to delve into an investigation so as to determine the reasons leading to the commission
of suicide by the students when categorical statements regarding caste-based harassment and
discrimination were made in the complaint. The SC/ST (PoA) Act, 1989 was enacted with the intent
to enlarge the scope of criminal liability by including several acts or omissions of atrocities that were
not covered by the I.P.C. or the Protection of Civil Liberties Act, 1955 as summed up by this Court in
National Campaign on Dalit Human Rights v. Union of India, (2017) 2 SCC 432.
44. We also take notice of the following:
“No. 15011/91/2013-SC/ST-W Government of India/Bharat Sarkar Ministry of Home
Affairs ***** NDCC - II Building, Jai Singh Road New Delhi Dated the 12th October,
2015 To The Chief Secretaries All State Governments/UT Administrations Subject:
Advisory on no discrimination in compulsory registration of FIRs-
Regarding Sir/Madam,
1. Reference is invited to this Ministry’s Advisories dated 10th May 2013 and 5th
February 2014 regarding compulsory registration of FIR u/s 154 Cr P.C. (copies
enclosed).
2. In these advisories it was made clear that as per section 154(1) of the Cr. P.C. a
police officer is duty bound to register a case on the basis of such information
disclosing a cognizable offence and FIR has to be registered irrespective of territorialAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 34

jurisdiction.
3. National Commission for Minorities in its Annual Report 2011-12 has
recommended prompt action in registration of FIRs, timely filing of charge sheet and
speedy trial to restore the faith of minorities. In this regard, it is pertinent to note
that registration of FIR is the first step in the whole process. Therefore all States/UTs
must ensure that utmost promptness in registering FIRs is extended to all those who
approach the police for registration of FIRs without any discrimination of whatever
kind. Once again it is requested to ensure that FIRs get registered in strict
compliance to above stated advisories.
4. It is requested to kindly ensure that these instructions are circulated amongst all
concerned Departments/ Organizations and others under your jurisdiction for strict
compliance.
Yours faithfully Kumar Alok Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India Tel No. 23438100.”
45. We also take notice of the following advisory dated 5.02.2024 issued by the Ministry of Home
Affairs:
“Mo. 15011/91/2013 - SC/ST-W Government of India Ministry of Home Affairs
Centre State Division 5th Floor, NDCC-II Building Jai Singh Road, New Delhi Dated
the 5th February, 2024 To The Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary (Home
Department) Sub:- Compulsory Registration of FIR u/s 154 Cr.P.C. when the
information makes out a cognizable offence Sir/Madam, This is in continuation to
the earlier advisory of the Ministry of Home Affairs dated 10-05-2013 regarding the
registration of FIR irrespective of territorial jurisdiction and zero FIR.
We had made it clear that as per section 154(1) of the Cr. P.C. a police officer is duty
bound to register a case on the basis of such information disclosing a cognizable
offence. We had also made it clear that when it becomes apparent that even if the
offence has been committed outside the jurisdiction of the police station, zero FIR
would still be registered and the FIR would be then transferred to the appropriate
police station as per Section 170 of the Cr.P.C.
2. A Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in W.P, (Cri.) No.68 of 2008 in Lalita
Kumar Vs Government of U.P. and others on 12-11-2013 had addressed the issue of
mandatory registration of FIRs and had held that registration of FIR either on the
basis of the information furnished by the informant when it makes out a cognizable
offence u/s 154(1) of the Cr.P.C. or otherwise u/s 157(1) of the Cr. P.C. is obligatory. It
also held that reliability, genuineness and credibility of the information are not
conditions precedent for registering a case u/s 154 of the Cr. P.C. Since the legislative
intent is to ensure that every cognizable offence is promptly investigated in
accordance with law, hence there is no discretion or option left with the police toAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 35

register or not to register an FIR once information of a cognizable offence has been
provided. The court was quite perturbed about the burking of crime registration and
has concluded that non-
registration of crime leads to dilution of rule of law and thus leads to definite lawlessness in the
society, which is detrimental to the society as a whole. It has hence called for action against erring
officers who do not register an FIR if information received by him/her discloses the commission of a
cognizable offence. It may be mentioned that Section 166A of Cr.P.C. prescribes a penalty of
imprisonment up to two years and also a fine for non- registration of a FIR for an offence described
u/s 166A. It may be also mentioned that if after investigation the information given is found to be
false, there is always an option to prosecute the complainant for filing a false FIR under Chapter XI
of the I.P.C.
3. The Supreme Court has provided for some exceptions to the mandatory registration of FIR and
for the conduct of preliminary inquiry which are as follows:
(a) If the information received does not disclose the commission of cognizable offence
but indicates the necessity for an inquiry, a preliminary inquiry may be conducted
only to ascertain whether a cognizable offence is disclosed or not. If the inquiry
discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, the FIR must be registered. In cases
where preliminary inquiry ends in closing the complaint, a copy of the entry of such
closure must be supplied to the first informant within one week and it must also
disclose the reasons in brief for closing the complaint and not proceeding further.
(b) The other categories of cases in which preliminary inquiry may be made are:
(i) Matrimonial disputes/family disputes
(ii) Commercial offences
(iii) Medical negligence cases
(iv) Corruption cases
(v) Cases where there is an abnormal delay in initiating criminal prosecution.
Example: over 3 months delay in reporting the matter without satisfactorily explaining the reasons
for delay
(vi) The Supreme Court has also insisted that all preliminary inquiries should be completed within 7
days and any delay with the causes should be reflected in the General Diary/Station House
Diary/Daily Diary.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 36

4. The Supreme Court has, inter-alia, deprecated the practice of first recording the information in
the General Diary and then conducting a preliminary inquiry and thereafter registering the FIR. It
has clarified that registration of the FIR is to be done in the FIR Register/Book (in the standard
format prescribed) and in addition, the gist or substance of the FIR is to be recorded in the General
Diary as mandated in the Police Act or Police Regulations.
5. In addition, to ensure accountability in the functioning of police, the Supreme Court emphasized
that all actions of the police should be reduced to writing and documented through entries made in
the General Diary of the Police Station.
6. Home Departments of the States/UTs may direct the DGPs/IGPs to issue necessary instructions
in the light of the above advisory so that ail police officers are made aware of them and the contents
are also incorporated in the training curriculum of the police personnel.
7. The receipt of the same may kindly be acknowledged.” (S. Suresh Kumar) Joint Secretary (CS)”
46. The aforesaid advisory makes the following very clear:
i. Registration of an F.I.R. is mandatory under Section 154 of the Code, if the
information discloses commission of a cognizable offence and no preliminary inquiry
is permissible in such a situation.
ii. If the information received does not disclose a cognizable offence but indicates the
necessity for an inquiry, a preliminary inquiry may be conducted only to ascertain
whether a cognizable offence is disclosed or not.
iii. If the inquiry discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, the F.I.R. must be
registered. In cases where preliminary inquiry ends in closing the complaint, a copy
of the entry of such closure must be supplied to the first informant forthwith and not
later than one week. It must disclose reasons in brief for closing the complaint and
not proceeding further.
iv. The police officer cannot avoid his duty of registering the offence if a cognizable
offence is disclosed. Action must be taken against erring officers who do not register
an F.I.R. if information received by them discloses a cognizable offence.
v. The scope of preliminary inquiry is not to verify the veracity or otherwise of the
information received but only to ascertain whether the information reveals any
cognizable offence.
vi. As to what type and in which cases preliminary inquiry is to be conducted will
depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. The category of cases in which
preliminary inquiry may be made are as under:Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 37

a. Matrimonial disputes/ family disputes b. Commercial offences c. Medical
negligence cases d. Corruption cases e. Cases where there is an abnormal delay in
initiating criminal prosecution, for example, over three months delay in reporting the
matter without satisfactorily explaining the reasons for delay. The aforesaid are only
illustrations and not exhaustive of all conditions which may warrant preliminary
inquiry.
vii. While ensuring and protecting the rights of the accused and the complainant, a
preliminary inquiry should be made time bound and in any case it should not exceed
7 days. The fact of such delay and the causes of it must be reflected in the General
Diary entry.
viii. Since the General Diary/Station Diary/Daily Diary is the record of all
information received in a police station, we direct that all information relating to
cognizable offences, whether resulting in registration of an F.I.R. or leading to an
inquiry, must be mandatorily and meticulously reflected in the said Diary and the
decision to conduct a preliminary inquiry must also be reflected, as mentioned above.
F. CONCLUSION
47. We are of the view that responsibility of maintaining the safety and well-being of
students rests heavily on the administration of every educational institution.
Therefore, in the event of any unfortunate incident, such as a suicide occurring on
campus, it becomes their unequivocal duty to promptly lodge an F.I.R. with the
appropriate authorities. Such action is not only a legal obligation but also a moral
imperative to ensure transparency, accountability, and the pursuit of justice.
Simultaneously, it is incumbent upon the police authorities to act with diligence and
responsibility by registering the FIR without refusal or delay. This ensures that due
process of law is upheld, and a thorough investigation can be conducted to uncover
the truth and address any underlying causes. The harmonious discharge of these
duties by both educational institutions and law enforcement agencies is essential to
prevent the recurrence of such tragedies and to preserve trust in societal institutions.
In a given case, failure on part of the administration of any educational institution
may be viewed strictly.
48. For all the foregoing reasons we direct the DCP (South-West District, New Delhi)
to register the First Information Report in line with two respective complaints lodged
in writing by the kith and kin of the two students who committed suicide and depute
any responsible officer, not below the rank of Assistant Commissioner of Police, to
undertake the investigation in accordance with law. We need not say anything further
as investigation of any crime is within the domain of the police.
G. NATIONAL TASK FORCE TO ADDRESS THE MENTAL HEALTH CONCERNS OF STUDENTS
AND PREVENT THE COMMISSION OF SUICIDES IN HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONSAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 38

49. However, we do not intend to close the matter just with a direction to register the F.I.R. We
deem it absolutely necessary to discuss the disturbing pattern of student suicides being reported
from various educational institutes across the country.
50. On 19th March, 2025, a third-year law student, aged 21 years, at the Gujarat National Law
University (GNLU) was found dead in his dorm room. The deceased student was a native of Patiala
in Punjab.
He had apparently hanged himself from the latch and was found on the floor.1
51. On 25th February, 2025, a third-year student at the Indian Institute of Technology, Patna took
his life by allegedly jumping from the seventh floor of his hostel premises situated within the
campus itself allegedly owing to excessive academic pressure.2
52. On 15th February, 2025, a third-year student pursuing a Bachelors in Technology from Kalinga
Institute of Industrial Technology (KIIT) campus in Bhubaneswar, Odisha, was found hanging from
the ceiling fan in her hostel room on account of alleged sexual harassment and blackmailing by a
fellow student.3 Gujarat National Law University student ends life on campus, THE TIMES OF
INDIA, March 19, 2025.
IIT Patna student dies by ‘suicide’ on campus, THE INDIAN EXPRESS, February 27, 2025.
Why suicide of Nepali student at Odisha’s KIIT campus forced Nepal PM to intervene, FIRSTPOST,
February 18, 2025.
53. On 18 February, 2024, a second-year student at the College of Veterinary and Animal Sciences,
Wayanad, Kerala, was found hanging in the bathroom of his hostel, after allegedly being tortured by
his seniors and batchmates days before his death.4
54. What disturbs us even more is that the abovementioned incidents are not isolated one-off
occurrences but are only a few out of the many which have taken place over a period of time owing
to a multitude of reasons like ragging, academic pressure, caste-based discrimination, sexual
harassment, etc. As per the data provided by the Union Minister of State for Education to the Rajya
Sabha in 2023, 98 students died by suicide in higher educational institutes since 2018, out of which
39 were from IITs, 25 from NITs, 25 from central universities, four from IIMs, three from IISERs
and two from IIITs.5
55. Each suicide is a personal tragedy that prematurely takes the life of an individual and has a
continuing ripple effect, affecting the lives Wayanad student suicide: Six arrested for college
student’s suicide, THE NEW INDIAN EXPRESS, February 29, 2024.
98 students died by suicide in higher educational institutes since 2018: Centre, HINDUSTAN
TIMES, July 27, 2023.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 39

of families, friends and communities. According to the 210th Report of the Law Commission of
India, suicide has been identified as one of the most significant factors contributing to the
premature and unnatural cessation of human life.6 The statistics contained in the Report of the
National Crime Records Bureau (for short, “the NCRB”) for the year 2021 highlight the grim reality
of over 13,000 students having lost their lives by committing suicide in the country which is almost
twice the already disturbing number a decade ago.
The number of student suicides has now surpassed suicides committed by farmers due to agrarian
distress, with a four percent rise in 2024 alone.7 According to the NCRB Report titled “Accidental
Deaths and Suicides in India, 2022” student suicides accounted for 7.6% of the total number of
suicides committed in India in 2022 with 1.2% of total suicides attributable to professional/career
problems and 1.2% to failure in examination.
56. In the backdrop of the rising incidence of student suicides on college campuses and in higher
educational institutions, including the Indian Law Commission of India, Report No. 210 on the
Humanisation and Decriminalisation of Attempt to Suicide, Para 1.5 (October 2008).
More Students Dying by Suicide Than Farmers Reveals Another Deadly Crisis, THE QUINT,
October 23, 2024.
Institutes of Technology (IITs), National Institutes of Technology (NITs) and Indian Institutes of
Management (IIMs), we believe that it is high time we take cognizance of this serious issue and
formulate comprehensive and effective guidelines to address and mitigate the underlying causes
contributing to such distress among students.
57. We believe from our little understanding that the suicide epidemic in educational institutions
can be attributed to a plethora of factors including but not limited to academic pressure, caste-based
discrimination, financial stress, and sexual harassment, with eminent institutions like the IITs and
NITs reporting high rates linked to exam failures8.
58. A number of news reports point out that caste-based discrimination is rampant and pervasive,
even in prestigious educational institutions, aggravating the sense of alienation among students
from marginalised communities. Caste-based discrimination on college campuses is in clear
violation of Article 15 of the Constitution which inter alia prohibits discrimination on the ground of
caste. In response to a question put up in the Rajya Sabha in 2021, the Ministry of Id.
Education submitted that 60% of the students who dropped-out from seven reputed IITs belonged
to the reserved categories.
59. We are aware that a coordinate Bench of this Court is in seisin of the issue pertaining to
caste-based discrimination in educational institutions in the case of Abeda Salim Tadvi & Anr. v.
Union of India & Ors., (W.P. (C) No. 1149/2019). Pursuant to the directions of this Court in the said
matter, the University Grants Commission (for short, “the UGC”) has published the draft University
Grants Commission (Promotion of Equity in Higher Education Institutions) Regulations, 2025. TheAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 40

avowed object of the said Regulations is to ensure a safe, inclusive, and equitable learning
environment for all students, faculty members, and staff by preventing any form of discrimination
based on religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth within Higher Educational Institutions.
60. The aforesaid draft Regulations published by the UGC also assume importance as the
phenomenon of “othering” of students belonging to the marginalised communities, whether based
on caste, gender or ethnicity, is being reported with an increasing frequency and it is only through
sensitization of students and the faculty members that it can be ensured that campuses become safe
spaces which are equal for students coming from the different walks of life.
61. While the steps taken by the UGC pursuant to the directions of this Court in Abeda Salim Tadvi
(supra) are in the right direction inasmuch as they aim to prevent all forms of on-campus
discrimination, we intend to take a step further towards creating an institutionalised mechanism for
ensuring the mental well-being of students studying in Higher Educational Institutions so as to
mitigate the instances of commission of suicides by students owing to discrimination, academic
pressure, harassment, or any other concern affecting the mental well-being of students.
62. Based on a survey conducted by Seena Mary Thankachan, a researcher at the Pune International
Centre, it was reported that 70% of the faculty members across IITs felt ill-equipped to address
mental health issues, and 90% lacked proper training to support students with such sensitive
concerns.9 Implementing strict anti-
discrimination policies, cultural sensitivity training, and support groups for marginalised students is
crucial to uproot institutional and OPINION: The silent crisis in the IITs, THE WEEK, July 27,
2024.
systemic discrimination against disadvantaged groups which effectively undermines their full and
equal social, economic, political, and cultural participation in society.10
63. The relentless pressure to perform in a purely score-based education system, coupled with the
extreme competition for limited seats in premier educational institutions, places a terrifying burden
on the students’ mental health. The inordinate burden on students to work on multiple projects
simultaneously exacerbates academic pressure.
Several students who come from competitive coaching centres bring pre-existing mental health
issues, which get further heightened when they enter Higher Educational Institutions. Although it is
difficult to eradicate this distress yet it can be managed by introducing flexible curricula, continuous
assessment methods, structured support for managing backlogs and on campus support for
psychological issues faced by the students.11
64. Another cause of student suicides remains brutality in the form of ragging, which is often
concealed by colleges and universities to Anjum Kadari v. Union of India, (2024) SCC OnLine SC
3129.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 41

Supra 8.
safeguard their reputation. This violates the right to dignity and education of students. It has been
clarified by this Court in Farzana Batool v. Union of India, (2021) SCC OnLine SC 3433 that “while
the right to pursue higher (professional) education has not been spelt out as a fundamental right in
Part III of the Constitution, it bears emphasis that access to professional education is not a
governmental largesse. Instead, the State has an affirmative obligation to facilitate access to
education, at all levels.”
65. The R.K. Raghavan Committee was appointed to curb the menace of ragging which detailed the
causes and actionable remedies in its 2007 Report. It was pointed out by the Committee that most
State laws only seek to prohibit, and not prevent, ragging, and “while prevention must lead to
prohibition, the reverse need not be true.” There also exist the UGC Regulations on Curbing the
Menace of Ragging in Higher Educational Institutions 2009, however, news reports have pointed
out that tangible actions have not been taken by the stakeholders other than mere formalities such
as mandating undertakings from students and parents against indulging in ragging, and putting up
no-ragging notices on university premises.12 While Unending ordeal: On continuing acts of ragging,
THE HINDU, November 27, 2023.
the existing guidelines need to be enforced, there is also a requirement of bringing in new measures
for providing psychological support to victims of ragging so as to stop them from taking extreme
steps like commission of suicide.
66. We are of the firm view that universities must acknowledge their role not just as centres of
learning but as institutions responsible for the well-being and holistic development of their
students. The failure to do so would mean failing the very purpose of education – to uplift,
empower, and transform lives. Universities assume the role of a parent when a student leaves his
home and comes to study on the campus of the university. As per the principle of ‘loco parentis’
when a student at the adolescent age or childhood is sent to school by the parents, it is also the duty
of the school authorities to play the role of parents in safeguarding the intertest and welfare of the
students. A person in loco parentis means a person taking upon himself the duty of a father of a
child to make a provision for that child. The duty of the college authorities is not just to ensure
academic excellence of the students but also to ensure their mental well-being, and not just exercise
authority and control over students but also to provide support in times of distress.
67. The nation has already suffered the tragic loss of numerous students – young individuals with
immense potential who could have gone on to become successful professionals. However, due to the
absence of adequate institutional support, they were driven to take the extreme step of ending their
own lives. These distressing incidents not only highlight systemic failures but also expose a severe
lack of institutional empathy and accountability on the part of educational institutions. When
academic environments fail to address discrimination, harassment, and mental health concerns
effectively, they contribute to a culture of neglect that can have devastating consequences.Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 42

68. As a society, and as stakeholders in shaping the future of our youth, we must take collective
responsibility to ensure that no more lives are lost due to apathy or indifference. It is imperative for
institutions to have a culture of sensitivity and proactive intervention so that every student feels
safe, supported, and empowered to pursue their aspirations without fear or discrimination.
69. The recurring instances of student suicides in Higher Educational Institutions, including private
educational institutions, serve as a grim reminder of the inadequacy and ineffectiveness of the
existing legal and institutional framework in addressing mental health concerns of students on
campuses and to prevent the students from taking the extreme step of committing suicides. These
tragedies underscore the urgent need for a more robust, comprehensive, and responsive mechanism
to address the various factors which compel certain students to resort to taking their own lives. In
light of the concerns expressed above, a National Task Force to address the mental health concerns
of students and prevent the commission of suicides in Higher Educational Institutions is being
constituted and shall comprise of the following members:
i. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat, Former Judge, Supreme Court of India, as the
Chairperson;
ii. Dr. Alok Sarin, Consultant Psychiatrist, Sitaram Bhartia Institute of Science &
Research, New Delhi;
iii. Prof. Mary E. John (retired), Former Director, Centre for Women’s Development
Studies, New Delhi;
iv. Mr. Arman Ali, Executive Director, National Centre for Promotion of Employment
for Disabled People;
v. Prof. Rajendar Kachroo, Founder, Aman Satya Kachroo Trust;
vi. Dr. Aqsa Shaikh, Professor of the Department of Community Medicine in
Hamdard Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, New Delhi;
vii. Dr. Seema Mehrotra, Professor of Clinical Psychology, NIMHANS;
viii. Prof. Virginius Xaxa, Visiting Professor at the Institute for Human Development
(IHD), New Delhi;
ix. Dr. Nidhi S. Sabharwal, Associate Professor, Centre for Policy Research in Higher
Education, National University of Educational Planning and Administration, New
Delhi;
x. Ms. Aparna Bhat, Senior Advocate (as amicus curiae).
70. The following shall be the ex-officio members of this Task Force:Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 43

i. Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education, Government of
India;
ii. Secretary, Department of Social Justice & Empowerment, Ministry of Social
Justice & Empowerment, Government of India;
iii. Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India;
iv. Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government
of India.
71. We direct the Chief Secretaries of all the States/Union Territories to nominate a high ranking
officer, not below the rank of Joint Secretary in the Department of Higher Education of the
respective State/Union Territory, to act as the nodal officer on behalf of the respective State/Union
Territory. We further direct all the concerned departments/authorities of the respective State/Union
Territory to cooperate with the nodal officer concerned and furnish necessary information, data and
assistance as may be sought by such nodal officer.
72. The Joint Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education, Government of
India shall act as the convener of the Task Force.
73. The Task Force includes representatives from diverse fields to ensure an interdisciplinary
approach to tackling the issue of commission of suicides in Higher Educational Institutions.
74. The remit of this Task Force is to prepare a comprehensive report that includes:
i. Identification of the predominant causes which lead to commission of suicides by
students: An examination of the various causes which lead to student suicides in
Higher Educational Institutions, including but not limited to ragging, caste-based
discrimination, gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, academic pressure,
financial burden, mental health related stigma, discrimination based on ethnicity,
tribal identity, disability, sexual orientation, political views, religious belief or any
other grounds.
ii. Analysis of Existing Regulations: A thorough assessment of the effectiveness of
current laws, policies, and institutional frameworks applicable to Higher Educational
Institutions concerning ragging, caste-based and gender-based discrimination, sexual
harassment, mental health support, support for students facing academic challenges,
financial support to students in need of funds, etc. This analysis will evaluate whether
these frameworks adequately address the challenges faced by students.
iii. Recommendations for Strengthening Protections:Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 44

Proposing necessary reforms to the existing legal and institutional frameworks to
ensure stronger enforcement, accountability, and preventive measures. The Task
Force shall also put forth recommendations to address existing gaps, create a more
inclusive and supportive academic environment, and ensure equal opportunities for
members of marginalized communities.
75. In the process of preparing its report, the Task Force shall have the authority to conduct surprise
inspections of any Higher Educational Institution. Additionally, the Task Force shall be at liberty to
make further recommendations beyond the specified mandate, wherever necessary, to ensure a
holistic and effective approach towards addressing mental-health concerns of students and
eliminating the incidence of suicides in Higher Educational Institutions. The Task Force is
requested to take into account the views and concerns of all stakeholders, including those of student
unions, whether elected or nominated and other student representative bodies, wherever they exist.
The Task Force is also requested to seek representation from and consult the governments of all the
States and Union Territories.
The Task Force may also consider obtaining the views of the different stakeholders by way of
circulating a questionnaire and seeking written responses thereupon.
76. It is clarified that the term “Higher Educational Institution” is used broadly to cover all higher
educational institutions, including government and private universities, deemed to be universities,
government and private colleges, etc.
77. The Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education; the Secretary,
Department of Social Justice & Empowerment, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment; the
Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development; and the Secretary, Department of Legal
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India, shall collaborate with the Task Force and
extend full cooperation by providing all necessary information, documents, and resources required
by the Task Force to effectively carry out its mandate.
78. The Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education, Government of India
shall serve as the Member-
Secretary of the Task Force. The Ministry of Education, Government of India shall be responsible for
providing all necessary logistical support to facilitate the functioning of the Task Force. This shall
include making arrangements for travel, accommodation, and secretarial assistance, as well as
covering all related expenses of the Task Force members. The Ministry shall provide a sufficiently
large office space to the Task Force for holding its meetings and also to enable the officials to carry
on its day-to-day activities. Additionally, the Ministry shall provide an appropriate honorarium to
the members in recognition of their contributions.
79. We also direct that the Central Government, the Governments of all the States/Union Territories
and agencies thereof, and Universities shall extend their full and active cooperation to the Task
Force and provide the requisite data, information and assistance, as may be necessary. In the case ofAmit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 45

delay, reluctance or neglect on part of the aforesaid bodies, the Task Force will be at liberty to
approach this Court through the amicus curiae seeking remedial actions.
80. The Chairperson of the Task Force shall be at liberty to engage the services of any person for the
purpose of providing secretarial assistance in coordinating with the members of the Task Force,
preparation of the interim and final report and for the smooth and effective discharge of any other
responsibilities as may arise during the course of carrying out the mandate of the Task Force. This
shall include the engagement of the services of Data Analysts and Research Assistants as may be
necessary for the effective discharge of the mandate of the Task Force.
81. The Chairperson of the Task Force shall also be at liberty to constitute, after due consultation
with the members of the Task Force, committees and sub-committees as may be required for the
purpose of carrying out specific functions.
82. We direct the Union of India to deposit an amount of Rupees Twenty Lacs (Rs 20,00,000/-)
with the Registry within two weeks from the date of this order as an outlay for the initial operations
of the Task Force. The amicus curiae shall be at liberty to move an appropriate application seeking
orders for disbursement of any additional funds, whenever necessary. We clarify that this amount is
in addition to the financial and administrative responsibility of the Ministry of Education as
described aforesaid.
83. The Task Force is requested to present an interim report within four months from the date of
this order. The final report shall be submitted preferably within eight months from the date of this
order.
84. We treat this matter as part heard. The registry shall notify this matter after four months
alongwith the interim report of the Task Force before this very Bench (J.B. Pardiwala and R.
Mahadevan, JJ.) after obtaining appropriate orders from Honourable the Chief Justice of India.
…………………………………………J (J.B. PARDIWALA) …………………………………………J (R.
MAHADEVAN) New Delhi;
24th March, 2025Amit Kumar vs Union Of India on 24 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83939867/ 46