Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central
Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Author: Abhay S. Oka
Bench: Pankaj Mithal, Abhay S Oka
2025 INSC 84                                                               Reportable
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5642 OF 2009
              Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd.                         … Appellant
                                                    versus
              Commissioner of Central Excise
              Nashik Commissionerate                                   … Respondent
                                                     with
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8025-27 OF 2010
                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5686 OF 2014
                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9838 OF 2017
                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5516 OF 2019
                                                     and
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10890 OF 2024
                                               JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL CONTROVERSY CIVIL APPEAL NO.5642 OF 2009
1. The appellant in Civil Appeal No. 5642 of 2009 is Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (for short,
‘BPCL’). It is a public-sector Date: 2025.01.20 18:48:23 IST Reason:
undertaking. BPCL has a refinery in Mumbai and an extensive network of
installations and depots nationwide. Similarly, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (for short,
‘IOCL’), Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (for short, ‘HPCL’) and Indo-Burma
Petroleum Company Ltd. (for short, ‘IBP’) also have refineries, installations and
depots at different places in the country. Later on, IBP merged with IOCL. We referBharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 1

to BPCL, IOCL and HPCL as the Oil Marketing Companies (for short, ‘the OMCs’) for
convenience.
2. On 30th June 2000, the Central Board of Excise & Customs, Ministry of Finance, Department of
Revenue, Government of India (for short, ‘the Board’), issued a circular clarifying the meaning of the
expression ‘transaction value’ as defined under clause (d) of Section 4(3) of the Central Excise Act,
1944 (for short, ‘the 1944 Act’). Up to 31st March 2002, the price of petroleum products was fixed
based on the Administered Price Mechanism (for short, ‘APM’). This system was done away with
effect from 1st April 2002. On 31st March 2002, a Memorandum of Understanding (for short, ‘the
MOU’), which was named as the Multilateral Product Sale- Purchase Agreement, was executed by
and between the OMCs at the behest of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for a period of
two years commencing from 1st April 2002. Under the MOU, it was mutually agreed that the OMCs
should sell and purchase petroleum products among themselves and/or to one another at the
Import Parity Price (for short, ‘IPP’), which is defined as the landed cost of the products at the
nearest port, plus the cost of transportation from the said port to the storage point of the selling
OMC. IPP also includes terminal charges. Purchase and sale transactions of petroleum products
between OMCs were to be made based on the MOU. The receiving OMC would further sell the
petroleum products to their own dealers. The price fixed in accordance with the IPP was lower than
the price at which the selling OMC sold its petroleum products directly to its own dealers. It was
alleged that the purpose of the said MOU was to ensure the smooth supply and distribution of
petroleum products, to avoid any disruption in supply all over India, and to save on transportation
costs of the OMCs, when compared with procuring petroleum products solely from their respective
refineries.
3. Between 2002 and 2005, the Department issued several show-cause notices to the OMCs. The
show cause notices proposed to arrive at the excise duty payable under the 1944 Act by referring to
the price at which an OMC sold petroleum products to its own dealers rather than the price at which
the OMCs sold petroleum products to one another and/or among themselves, i.e., the IPP. The
appellant contends that some show cause notices were dropped, and some were confirmed. In those
cases where show cause notices were dropped, the Commissioners accepted the IPP as the
‘transaction value’, and the Department did not challenge the same.
4. In the case of the show cause notices which were not dropped, demands were confirmed, which
led to the OMCs approaching the Customs, Excise & Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short, ‘the
Tribunal’) after confirmation of the demands. In one such appeal in Hindustan Petroleum
Corporation Ltd. v. Commissioner of Central Excise1, by judgment dated 28th February 2005, the
Tribunal set aside the Order-in-Original. This judgment was carried before this Court by way of a
civil appeal, which was summarily dismissed vide order dated 3rd January 2006.
(2005) 187 ELT 479 (Tri-Bang)
5. On 12th March 2007, the Commissioner of Central Excise and Customs, Nashik, issued a show
cause notice to BPCL alleging that provisions of the 1944 Act and Central Excise Rules, 2002 have
been contravened. The differential duty payable from 1st April 2002 to 5th September 2004 wasBharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 2

quantified at Rs. 119,11,49,418/- (Rupees one hundred nineteen crores, eleven lakhs, forty-nine
thousand, four hundred and eighteen only). Demand for education cess, interest, and penalty was
also raised in the show cause notice. BPCL filed its reply to the show cause notice.
6. The demand was confirmed by the Commissioner vide order dated 8th December 2007. The
extended period of limitation was invoked, and a penalty was also imposed under Section 11AC of
the 1944 Act. Being aggrieved by the order of the Commissioner, the appellant preferred an appeal
before the West Zonal Bench of the Tribunal. The Tribunal upheld the order dated 8th December
2007. That is how BPCL has preferred Civil Appeal No. 5642 of 2009.
Civil Appeal Nos. 8025-8027 of 2010
7. Civil Appeal Nos. 8025-8027 of 2010 have been preferred by the Revenue. The respondent is
IOCL. In this case, a show cause notice was issued on 30th March 2007 alleging that the assessee
had adopted two different assessable values for the same product to compute excise duty. The first
value taken was the price used for sale to their own dealers, and the second was the IPP used for sale
to other OMCs. It was alleged that IOCL had suppressed the MOU. The Commissioner invoked the
extended period of limitation and confirmed the demand. Being aggrieved by the demand, IOCL
preferred an appeal before the Tribunal. The Tribunal interfered with the demand by the impugned
judgment. The Tribunal relied upon its own decision in the case of Hindustan Petroleum
Corporation Ltd.1 It was pointed out that this Court summarily dismissed an appeal preferred by the
Revenue against the decision in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.1 Therefore, in this case, the
Revenue is in appeal.
8. Civil Appeal No.5686 of 2014 is also preferred by the Revenue. The respondent is again IOCL.
Even in this case, a similar order was passed by the Commissioner where the extended period of
limitation was invoked, and the Commissioner confirmed the demand. The Tribunal set aside the
order of the Commissioner on the basis of the decision of the Tribunal in the case of Hindustan
Petroleum Corporation Ltd1. Therefore, the Revenue is in appeal.
9. As far as Civil Appeal No. 9838 of 2017 is concerned, the assessee is BPCL. Three show cause
notices were served upon BPCL, and the demand in the show cause notices was made absolute by
the Commissioner. It is to be noted that the Commissioner invoked the extended period of
limitation for one such show cause notice bearing Sl. No. 10/2004 dated 26.10.2004. The Tribunal
interfered by observing that in the facts of the case, the adjudication on the basis of show cause
notice has travelled beyond the show cause notice. As the Tribunal interfered, the Revenue is in
appeal.
10. Civil Appeal No.5516 of 2019 is again preferred by the Revenue. A similar show-cause notice was
issued to IOCL. The demand in the show cause notice was made absolute under Section 11A(2) of
the 1944 Act, i.e., without invoking the extended period of limitation. The Tribunal interfered in an
appeal preferred by IOCL again by relying upon its own decision in the case of Hindustan Petroleum
Corporation Ltd1. Therefore, the Revenue is in appeal.Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 3

11. In Civil Appeal No.10890 of 2024, IOCL is the respondent, and Revenue is the appellant. In this
case, the Commissioner did not confirm the demand under the show cause notices against which the
Revenue preferred an appeal before the Tribunal. While the Commissioner did not adjudicate on the
question of limitation, it appears that the extended period of limitation was invoked in the show
cause notices for only parts of the demand. The order of the Commissioner was confirmed by the
Tribunal by relying upon the decision in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.1 and other similar
decisions. Therefore, the Revenue is in appeal.
12. We may note here that the MOU that is the subject matter of these appeals is the same.
SUBMISSIONS
13. The learned senior counsel, Shri S.K. Bagaria, argued on behalf of BPCL. Shri V.
Lakshmikumaran appeared for OMCs, and Shri Balbir Singh, ASG, represented the Revenue.
14. In support of Civil Appeal no.5642 of 2009, learned senior counsel pointed out that this Court is
concerned with Section 4 of the 1944 Act as amended with effect from 1st July 2000. He relied upon
the interpretation put by this Court to Section 4 in the case of CCE v. Grasim Industries Ltd.2, CCE
v. Ispat Industries Ltd.3, and CCE v. CERA Boards and Doors4. He submitted that by virtue of the
substitution of Section 4 with effect from 1st July 2000, the concept of ‘normal value’ has given way
to the concept of ‘transaction value’. He submitted that the actual price paid or payable on each
removal of goods becomes a transaction value, as defined in sub-section 3(d) of Section 4. It means
the price actually paid or payable for the goods. The submission of the learned senior counsel is that
Section 4 permits the assessee to charge different prices from different buyers. He submitted that if
different prices were charged for different removals, prices actually paid or payable for each removal
become the value for the levy of excise duty. Further submission of the learned senior counsel is that
it is lawful (2018) 7 SCC 733 (2016) 1 SCC 631 (2020) 9 SCC 662 for BPCL to charge different prices
to OMCs for sales made to them vis-à-vis their own dealers.
15. The learned senior counsel relied upon the terms of the MOU, which incorporate a price fixation
formula in MOU based on IPP, which is defined to mean the landed cost of a product at a particular
port, which would include all applicable elements.
16. The learned senior counsel relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of D.J. Malpani v.
CCE5 in the context of putting narrow construction. The learned counsel submitted that, in addition
to the price actually paid or payable for the goods, transaction value includes any additional amount
the buyer is liable to pay to the assessee. He submitted that in the instant case, over and above the
invoice price actually charged, no amount, either in cash or otherwise, was paid or payable by the
OMCs to the appellant, and the price charged was always the sole consideration for the sale. He
submitted that the sales to OMCs were made for delivery at the time and place of removal. He
submitted that the parties to the MOU were not related to each other, and therefore, Section 4(1)(a)
was squarely applicable. He (2019) 9 SCC 120 also relied upon a Circular dated 30th June 2000
issued by the Board. He submitted that the MOU was entered into based on a letter dated 21st
August 2001 from the Additional Secretary, Government of India. He also relied upon a CircularBharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 4

dated 14th February 2007 issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Finance, which records
that the MOU was entered into between different PSUs, i.e., OMCs herein, at the behest of the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. He submitted that the decision in the case of Hindustan
Petroleum Corporation Ltd1, was affirmed by this Court by summary dismissal of appeal preferred
by Revenue by a Bench of three Hon’ble Judges by order dated 3rd March 2006. He submitted that
in view of the judgment of this Court in the case of V.M. Salgaocar and Bros. Pvt. Ltd. v. CIT6, the
decision of the Tribunal has merged into the order of this Court. Hence, the Tribunal could not have
made a departure from the view taken in the said case as the Tribunal was bound by it. He pointed
out that the decision in the case of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd1 has been followed by the
Tribunal in several cases. (2000) 5 SCC 373
17. He submitted that the decision to invoke an extended period of limitation under proviso to
Section 11A (1) of the 1944 Act was completely erroneous. He submitted that the instructions of the
Board dated 14th February 2007 referred to the MOU, and therefore, there was no question of
withholding the MOU from the Department. He submitted that this was not a case of fraud,
collusion or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of facts and, therefore, the extended period of
limitation could not be invoked. Hence, there was no reason to impose a penalty under Section 11
AC.
18. The learned counsel appearing for IOCL in Civil Appeal Nos. 8025-27 of 2010 has also made
detailed arguments. He also argued the issue of the merger of the decision of the Tribunal in the
case of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd1 with the order of this Court summarily dismissing
the appeal. In support of his contention based on the merger, he relied upon a decision of this Court
in the case of Kunhayammed & Ors v. State of Kerala & Anr.7.
(2000) 6 SCC 359
19. He submitted that the sale price based on IPP when the petroleum products are sold to OMC
should be taken as transaction value, especially when the transaction is on a principal-to-principal
basis at arm’s length. In his submission, this would show that the price is the sole consideration for
the sale. He pointed out that as provided in Article 4 of the MOU, there was, in fact, a sale of
petroleum products. He submitted that the IPP is not a notional price but an arm’s length price.
Relying upon a decision of this Court in the case of Commissioner of Central Excise, Hyderabad v.
Detergents India Ltd.8, he submitted that it is permissible to sell the same product at different
prices to different parties. In such a case, the actual sale value will be taken as transaction value. He
submitted that apart from the fact that no extra-commercial consideration flows from the MOU, the
same has been executed as per the directions of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. He also
submitted that recourse could not have been taken to the extended period of limitation as there was
no suppression of material facts by IOCL. (2015) 7 SCC 198
20. Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG appearing for the Revenue submitted that neither in the case of
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd1 nor in the case of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Central Excise, Nashik9, the interpretation of various clauses in the MOU has been
made. Moreover, there is no finding recorded in both the decisions of the Tribunal on the issue ofBharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 5

whether the price was the sole consideration for the sale. He submitted that even assuming there
was a merger of the decision in the case of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.1 with the order of
the Supreme Court summarily dismissing the appeal, the Tribunal has not considered whether the
price fixed under the MOU was the sole consideration for sale. He submitted that in the impugned
judgment that is the subject matter of Civil Appeal no.5642 of 2009, the Tribunal had considered
the various clauses of the MOU in detail and has recorded a finding of fact that the price was not the
sole consideration for sale. He pointed out that by the letter dated 21st August 2001, the Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas has only directed that there has to be an MOU for product sharing
arrangements between OMCs so that region-wise and company- (2009) 242 ELT 358 (Mumbai)
wise supply-demand balance could be arrived at. He submitted that the question here is whether
price is the sole consideration of sale, even assuming that the MOU has been drawn in terms of the
directions of the Ministry. He submitted that the OMCs did not produce a copy of the MOU, and,
therefore, there was justification for invoking the extended period of limitation on the ground of
suppression of material facts.
OUR VIEW IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.5642 OF 2009
21. The issues involved can be broadly summarised as under:
(i) Whether the price was the sole consideration of sale?
(ii) Whether the revenue was entitled to invoke an extended period of limitation
under the proviso to Section 11A(1) of the 1944 Act?
(iii) Whether the revenue was entitled to levy a penalty under Section 11AC of the
1944 Act?
WHETHER PRICE WAS THE SOLE CONSIDERATION FOR SALE
22. Section 4(1) of the 1944 Act reads thus:
“4. Valuation of excisable goods for purposes of charging of duty of excise.— (1)
Where under this Act, the duty of excise is chargeable on any excisable goods with
reference to their value, then, on each removal of the goods, such value shall—
(a) in a case where the goods are sold by the assessee, for delivery at the time and
place of the removal, the assessee and the buyer of the goods are not related and the
price is the sole consideration for the sale, be the transaction value;
(b) in any other case, including the case where the goods are not sold, be the value
determined in such manner as may be prescribed.” (emphasis added)
23. Therefore, for applicability of clause (a) of Section 4(1), the following conditions must be
fulfilled:Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 6

a. The assessee sells the goods for delivery at time and place of the removal;
b. The assessee and the buyer are not related; and c. The price is the sole
consideration for the sale.
Only if all three conditions are fulfilled, the value of the goods for the purpose of
computation of excise duty will be the transaction value. In a given case, if it is not
proved that the price was the sole consideration for sale, clause (a) of Section 4(1)
would not apply. In that case, clause (b) of Section 4(1) would apply.
24. We have perused the MOU dated 31st March 2001. IOCL, HPCL, BPCL and IBP are the parties
to the MOU. As stated earlier, IBP later merged with IOCL. Recital nos. (i), (ii) and (iii) are very
relevant, which read thus:
“(i) All the above Oil Marketing Companies except IBP are engaged in the business of
refining crude .. and for this purpose have established …./associate refineries and all
the above Oil Marketing Companies are engaged in the business of marketing or
petroleum products and for this purpose have established large product handling &
marketing infrastructure.
(ii) All the above Oil Marketing Companies are desirous to avail of product
sharing/assistance from each other in order to ensure smooth supply and
distribution of POL products and to avoid any kind of disruption of supply all over
India.
(iii) At present, the parties to this Agreement are Government of India Undertakings
and for their mutual benefit, the parties had various discussions among themselves
and reached agreement of using the available product of each other on the terms and
conditions contained hereinafter. Further, if during the agreement period, any of the
parties undergoes disinvestment of their Government equity holding, then subject to
Government of India’s residual equity holding continuing in the party/parties, this
Agreement shall hold good.” (emphasis added) As seen from clause (ii), the MOU has
been executed so that the OMCs can avail of product sharing/assistance from each
other.
Product sharing/assistance was required to ensure the smooth supply and distribution of petroleum
products and to ensure that there is no disruption in the supply of petroleum products to OMCs all
over India. Recital no. (iii) sheds light on the real nature of the transaction reflected in the MOU.
The object is to use the available products of each OMC on the terms and conditions set forth in the
MOU. Thus, the object of the MOU is not to sell petroleum products on a commercial basis to other
OMCs. The real object is to ensure that each OMC gets a smooth supply of petroleum products and
any disruption of supply is avoided. Therefore, the emphasis is on allowing individual OMCs access
to each other’s products and facilitating the sale of petroleum products to their respective
dealers/customers. The sale of products under the MOU is for the benefit of the respective businessBharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 7

activities of the OMCs.
25. Clause 2.10 defines “Group of Refineries” as IOCL and its associates, including different
companies/ refineries, as stated therein. The group of refineries also include Reliance Petroleum
Limited (for short, ‘RPL’). Clause 2.14 defines an “Industry Logistics Plan (ILP)” as an All India
Supply and Distribution Plan jointly drawn by the OMCs based on the industry’s product availability
and market demands for particular months. Thus, the All India Supply and Distribution Plan,
known as ILP, was jointly drawn by the OMCs, considering the market demand and availability.
26. Clause 4.1 of the MOU provides that OMCs agree to sell and purchase the products to each other
in such quantities as determined based on the principles laid down in the ILP procedure. The ILP
procedure is drawn jointly by the OMCs to ensure that adequate supply for each one of them is
available.
27. Clause 4.3 of the MOU reads thus:
“4.3 It is agreed that any shortfall in actual upliftment quantity ex RPL versus
Monthly reassessed Quantity of Oil Marketing Companies, shall be reduced by the
excess quantity of the Product that RPL has delivered in the month to any other Oil
Marketing Company against its respective Monthly Quantity.” 27.1 Clause 4.6 of the
MOU reads thus:
“4.6 Coastal movement shall be as per the detailed procedure, as mutually agreed, as
placed at Annexure B.” Clause 4.6 refers to coastal movement. Clause 2.4 defines
“Coastal Plan” which implies that a plan for tanker loading, movement and discharge
was prepared jointly by OMCs.
28. Therefore, after taking into consideration the aforementioned parts of the MOU, it is crystal
clear that the arrangement reflected from the MOU is essentially for ensuring that every OMC gets
smooth and uninterrupted supply all over India, irrespective of whether an OMC has a refinery or
otherwise in a particular part of India. Thus, from a plain reading of the MOU, we find that the real
consideration for the MOU was to ensure an uninterrupted supply to all the OMCs at various places
in India. The MOU incorporates mutual arrangements made by MNCs for an uninterrupted supply
of petroleum products so that MNCs can further sell the products to their dealers. By no stretch of
the imagination, it can be said that the price fixed under the MOU was the sole consideration for the
sale by one OMC to the other. Hence, we concur with the conclusion in the impugned judgment that
the price was not the sole consideration for sale.
THE DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL IN HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM CORPORATION LTD1.
29. Now, we turn to the decision of the Tribunal in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.1, an
appeal against which has been summarily dismissed by this Court. We have carefully perused the
said decision. Apart from mentioning that the MOU was executed according to the direction of the
Government of India, the Tribunal has not looked into the contents of the MOU. There is a vagueBharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 8

reference to HPCL's agreement with other oil companies. There is no specific finding recorded
therein, after considering the terms and conditions of the MOU, that the price was the sole
consideration for the sale. Therefore, the decision of the Tribunal ignores a crucial ingredient of
Section 4(1)(a) of whether the price was the sole consideration for the sale. The Tribunal has not
adverted to the question of whether the third condition in Section 4(1)(a) was complied with. Even
assuming that there is a merger of the decision in the case of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd1
with the order of this Court, the order of this Court does not constitute a binding decision on the
issue of compliance with the third condition in Section 4(1)(a) as the Tribunal had not decided the
said issue.
THE CIRCULAR DATED 14TH FEBRUARY 2007
30. Now, we come to the Circular issued by the Board on 14th February 2007. The circular refers to
the decision in the case of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.1 Though the circular mentions
that pending cases and future assessments of the product should be decided based on the said
decision, it was observed that the facts of the case decided by the Tribunal may be gone through
properly in order to apply to the pending cases as well as future assessments. Therefore, even the
Circular noted the requirement of applying the ratio to the facts of each case. Thus, the finding of the
fact recorded by the Tribunal in Civil Appeal No.5642 of 2009 that price was not the sole
consideration cannot be faulted with.
Was the extended period of limitation under the proviso to Section 11-A(1) of the 1944 Act
applicable?
31. Section 11A reads thus:
"Section 11A - Recovery of duties not levied or not paid or short-levied or short-paid
or erroneously refunded-
(1) When any duty of excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-levied or
short-paid or erroneously refunded, whether or not such non-levy or non-payment,
short-levy or short payment or erroneous refund, as the case may be, was on the basis
of any approval, acceptance or assessment relating to the rate of duty on or valuation
of excisable goods under any other provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder a Central Excise Officer may, within one year from the relevant date,
serve notice on the person chargeable with the duty which has not been levied or paid
or which has been short-levied or short-paid or to whom the refund has erroneously
been made, requiring him to show cause why he should not pay the amount specified
in the notice :
Provided that where any duty of excise has not been levied or paid or has been
short-levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded by reason of fraud, collusion or
any willful mis-statement or suppression of facts, or contravention of any of the
provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder with an intent to evadeBharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 9

payment of duty, by such person or his agent, the provisions of this sub-section shall
have effect as if, for the words "one year", the words "five years" were substituted :
Explanation : Where the service of the notice is stayed by an order of a Court, the
period of such stay shall be excluded in computing the aforesaid period of one year or
five years, as the case may be.” (emphasis added) Show cause notice dated 12th
March, 2007 was issued to BPCL.
The demand in the show cause notice was for the period from 1st April, 2002 to 5th
September, 2004. As per sub-section (1) of Section 11-A, a notice of demand could
have been issued within one year from the relevant date. The demand could be for a
short levy, short payment, non-levy, non-payment, or erroneous refund.
The period of one year is to be calculated from the relevant date as defined in
sub-section 3(ii) of Section 11-A. There is no dispute that the demand notice was not
issued within the stipulated period provided under sub-section (1) of Section 11-A,
and therefore, an extended period of limitation was invoked by the revenue.
32. Under the proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 11-A, an extended period of limitation can be
invoked when there is a non- levy or non-payment or short levy or short payment of the excise duty
by a reason of fraud or collusion or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of facts or
contravention of any of the provisions of 1944 Act or the rules made thereunder with the intent to
evade payment of duty. The show cause notice referred to the statements recorded of BPCL officers
and other OMCs. No detailed reasons have been recorded in support of invoking the extended
period of limitation by the Commissioner in his order. The High Court, in the impugned order, has
confirmed the extended period of limitation by recording the following findings in paragraph 44:
“44. On the question of time bar, we find that the show cause notice has alleged that
the contents of the MOU were not brought to the notice of the Commissionerate and
that M/s. BPCL has misled the Department into believing that the dual pricing
adopted by them has been done on the directive of the Govt. of India. This has not
been contested by the appellants. Their only defence is that mere non-submission of
the MOU cannot be a ground for invoking the extended time limit and there should
be some positive act of omission / commission for the same. Withholding the MOU
from the Department, and making the Department believe that the dual pricing was
adopted as per the directive of the Government cannot be considered to be innocent
acts. This is definitely a positive act, for which the extended time limit has been
rightly invoked.” (emphasis added)
33. Thus, the first ground is withholding or suppressing the MOU. We are dealing with a public
sector undertaking. It is pertinent to note that the impugned judgment incorporates the letter dated
14th February, 2007 issued by the Board. The letter itself records that to ensure a regular supply of
petroleum products, the Oil PSUs (OMCs) entered into an MOU at the behest of the Petroleum and
Natural Gas Ministry. It also refers to the decision of the Tribunal in the case of HindustanBharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 10

Petroleum Corporation Ltd.1 by stating that the said decision records that the sale price, as per the
MOU, correctly represents the transaction value. Therefore, the department was aware of the MOU
even before the date on which the show cause notice was issued. As noted earlier, the date of the
MOU is 31st March, 2002. Moreover, as indicated in the said letter, MOU was referred to in the
decision of the Tribunal in the case of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.1. It is pertinent to
note that the date of the said decision is 28th February, 2005. In fact, in the said decision, a
submission of the revenue has been recorded that the agreement between the oil companies
indicates that the price of petroleum products agreed thereunder is not a normal price and,
therefore, is not a transaction value. Hence, the first ground taken to support the invocation of the
extended period of limitation cannot be sustained.
34. The second ground is that BPCL made the department believe that dual pricing was adopted as
per the directions of the Government. A careful perusal of the show cause notice shows that it is not
alleged that any such misrepresentation was made by BPCL that the pricing as provided in the MOU
was adopted by the BPCL as per the directions of the Central Government. The reply to the show
cause notice submitted by the BPCL contains no such representation. In the show cause notice,
statements recorded of officers of BPCL and other OMCs have been referred to and relied upon.
However, it is not alleged that any of the officers stated that the price of the goods sold under the
MOU was fixed as per the directives of the Central Government. We have also carefully perused the
order passed by the Commissioner on the show cause notice. Even in the order, no specific reference
has been made to any such contention raised by BPCL or other OMCs. Even the order also refers to
statements of the officers of BPCL and other OMCs. Hence, both the grounds in support of invoking
an extended period of limitation cannot be sustained, and only on that ground, the demand cannot
be sustained.
WHETHER SECTION 11AC WAS APPLICABLE?
35. Then, we come to the penalty imposed under Section 11AC of the 1944 Act. Section 11AC reads
thus:
“11AC. Penalty for short-levy or non-levy of duty in certain cases Where any duty of
excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-levied or short-paid or
erroneously refunded by reasons of fraud, collusion or any wilful mis-statement or
suppression of facts, or contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of the
rules made there under with intent to evade payment of duty, the person who is liable
to pay duty as determined under sub-section (2) of section 11A, shall also be liable to
pay a penalty equal to the duty so determined:
Provided that where such duty as determined under sub-section (2) of section 11A,
and the interest payable thereon under section 11AB, is paid within thirty days from
the date of communication of the order of the Central Excise Officer determining
such duty, the amount of penalty liable to be paid by such person under this section
shall be twenty-five per cent. of the duty so determined:Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 11

Provided further that the benefit of reduced penalty under the first proviso shall be
available if the amount of penalty so determined has also been paid within the period
of thirty days referred to in that proviso:
Provided also that where the duty determined to be payable is reduced or increased
by the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal or, as the case may be, the
court, then, for the purposes of this section, the duty as reduced or increased, as the
case may be, shall be taken into account:
Provided also that in case where the duty determined to be payable is increased by
the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal or, as the case may be, the court,
then, the benefit of reduced penalty under the first proviso shall be available, if the
amount of duty so increased, the interest payable thereon and twenty-five per cent. of
the consequential increase of penalty have also been paid within thirty days of the
communication of the order by which such increase in the duty takes effect.
Explanation.--For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that--
(1) the provisions of this section shall also apply to cases in which the order
determining the duty under sub-section (2) of section 11A relates to notices issued
prior to the date on which the Finance Act, 2000 receives the assent of the President;
(2) any amount paid to the credit of the Central Government prior to the date of
communication of the order referred to in the first proviso or the fourth proviso shall
be adjusted against the total amount due from such person.” (emphasis added)
36. In this case, there is no allegation made by the Revenue of fraud, collusion or any wilful
mis-statement on the part of the appellant. The stand taken is that the MOU was suppressed, and
therefore, Section 11AC will apply. In view of the findings recorded above on the issue of the
invocation of the extended period of limitation, the penalty could not have been imposed.
37. In paragraph 40 of the impugned judgment, it is mentioned that BPCL did not submit any
argument on the valuation method adopted by the Commissioner, who has adopted Rule 11 read
with Rule 7. However, the Tribunal found that Rule 4 of the Central Excise Valuation Rules, 2000, is
the correct provision to be applied for valuation.
38. Therefore, the said appeal preferred by the BPCL deserves to be allowed by setting aside the
entire demand on the ground that the extended period of limitation could not be invoked. OTHER
APPEALS
39. As far as the other appeals are concerned, the OMCs have succeeded before the Tribunal.
Therefore, in the light of the findings recorded by us in Civil Appeal No.5642 of 2009, these appeals
will have to be remanded to the Tribunal for fresh adjudication.Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 12

40. Hence, we pass the following order:
i) Civil Appeal No.5642 of 2009 is hereby allowed. The impugned orders, including
the order dated 8th December 2007 passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise,
Nashik are hereby set aside;
ii) In the remaining appeals, the impugned judgments are hereby quashed and set
aside, and the appeals are remanded to the concerned Tribunals to decide the same
in accordance with the law laid down in this judgment and accordingly, the appeals
are partly allowed;
iii) We make it clear that after remand, the Tribunal will decide the cases in the light
of the findings recorded in this judgment; and
iv) There will be no orders as to costs.
.………......………………….J. (Abhay S Oka) ……….....…………………...J. (Pankaj Mithal) New Delhi;
January 20, 2025.Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Nashik ... on 20 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100808981/ 13