Bishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Author: Dipankar Datta
Bench: Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 32                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 87 OF 2025
                                    (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.)No.13370 of 2024)
                            BISHWAJIT DEY                                         .…. APPELLANT
                                                              VERSUS
                            THE STATE OF ASSAM                                   ..…RESPONDENT
                                                                   JUDGMENT
MANMOHAN, J
1. Leave granted.
2. The Criminal Appeal has been filed challenging the impugned judgment and order dated 23rd
January, 2024 passed by the Gauhati High Court at Assam in Case number Crl. Rev.
No.P/483/2023, whereby the appellant’s writ petition challenging the order dated 09th October,
2023 passed by the Additional Sessons Judge Karbi Anglong, Diphu, in Dillai Police Station case
No.32/2023, corresponding to G.R. Case No.150/2023 dated 05th October, 2023 was dismissed.
RELEVANT FACTS
3. Briefly stated the relevant facts of the present case are that the appellant had purchased a Truck
for commercial purpose bearing Registration No.AS-01-NC-4355 (hereinafter referred to as “the
Vehicle”) with the intent of plying the same. The Vehicle was purchased on monthly Equated
Monthly Instalment of Rs.1,00,020/- (One lakh and twenty rupees) and according to the appellant,
it is his only source of income.
4. On 10th April, 2023, the Vehicle was coming from Dimapur side and was signaled to stop at naka
checking point. The Police officer searched the Vehicle and found two identical soap boxes
containing suspected heroin which was covered in black polythene, kept concealed inside the
Tarpaulin and kept at the hood of the Vehicle.Bishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 1

5. The main accused namely, Md. Dimpul, in this connection, was arrested by the Police Officer.
After a field test, the said suspected substance was confirmed to be 24.8 gms. of heroin.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
6. According to the appellant, accused-Md. Dimpul boarded the Vehicle from Manipur as is stated
by the driver of the Vehicle namely Joherul Ali. It is averred in the petition that neither the appellant
(owner of the truck) nor his driver was aware that the said accused-Md. Dimpul was in possession of
the said substance and was carrying the same. Moreover, the driver and helper have been cited as
witnesses in the case as according to the appellant they were not involved in the offence.
7. The remand report of the arrested person clearly states that the suspected heroin was recovered
and seized from the possession of the accused-Md. Dimpul.
8. Thereafter, on 01st August, 2023, a chargesheet was filed before the Court of Special Judge,
NDPS by Sub-Inspector Sarat Kakoti under Section 21(b) of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 (for short ‘NDPS Act’) wherein it was stated that the accused-Md.Dimpul
carried the suspected heroin. Since learned counsel for the appellant placed heavy reliance on the
charge-sheet, the same is reproduced hereinbelow in its entirety:
“N.C.R.B L.I.F.-V FINAL FORM REPORT (Under section 173 Cr.P.C.) IN THE
COURT OF : In the court of Special Judge NDPS Diphu Karbi Anglong
1. District : KARBINGLONG P.S. : DILLAI PS Year : 2023 FIR No. :0032 Date :
10/04/2023
2. Final report / Change Sheet No.
3. Date : 01/08/2023
4. S.No. Acts Sections 1 NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC 21(b)
5. Type of Final Form Report : CHARGE SHEET
6. If FR Unoccurred
7. If Charge school : Original
8. name of I.O.at the time of charge sheet :
        SARAT KAKOTI      Rank : SI
                          No.
9. (a) Name of complainant / Informant :Bishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 2

Rajib Borah
(b) Father’s Name : Dhaniram Borah
10. Detail of Properties/Articles/Documents recovered/seized during Investigation
and relied upon:
S.No. Property Estimated Police From Disposal Description Value (in Station whom /
Rs.) Property where Register No. revered or seized 1 ELECTRICAL 000184/2023
/NH-36 in AND front of ELECTRONIC Lahorijan GOODS PP 2 DRUGS /
000183/2023 /NH-36 in NARCOTIC DRUGS front of Lahorijan PP 3 DOCUMENTS
000182/2023 /NH-36 in AND VALUABLE front of SECURITIES Lahorijan PP 4
AUTOMOBILES 000181/2023 /NH-36 in AND OTHERS front of Lahorijan PP
11. Particulars of accused charge-sheet : S.No.
(i) Name: Md. Dimpul Ali Whether verified : Yes
(ii) Father’s Name:
(iii) Data/ Year of birth : 1993
(iv) Sex: male
(v) Nationality : INDIA
(vi) Passport No. :
Date of Issue:
Place of Issue:
(vii) Religion :
(viii) Whether SC/ST/OBC: GENERAL
(ix) Occupation:
(x) Address:
1 Present Address No.2 Meda, Charaibari, SORBHOG, BARPETA, ASSAM, INDIA 2
Permanent Address No.2 Meda, Charaibari, SORBHOG,BARPETA, ASSAM, INDIA
Whether verified: Yes Regular Criminal No. :Bishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 3

(xii) Date of arrest: 10/04/2023
(xiii) Date of release on bail:
(xiv) Date on which forwarded to court:
(xv) Under Acts & Sections:
S.No. Acts Sections (xvi) Details of bailers / sureties:
N.C.R.B. L.I.F.-V Name:
Father’s / Husband’s name:
Occupation:
Address:
       S.No. Address Type                                 Address
       Identification:                                    Date of
       Birth:
       UID Number:
       Any Other ID Proof:
       S.No.           Id Type                      ID Number
(xvii) Previous conviction with case references:
S.No FIR State District Police Description Details of No. Station of case Conviction /
Acquittal (xvii) Status of the accused: FORWARDED TO COURT
12. Particulars of accused person – not charge sheeted (suspect):
13. Particular of witnesses to be examined :
S.No Name Father’s/ Dated/ Occupa Address Type of Husband’s name Year of tion
evidence to birth be tendered 1 Dhurba Present Arrest Das Address: Memo DILLAI
witness PS,KARBIAN GLONG, ASSAM, INDIA Permanent Address:
DILLAI PS, KARBIANGL ONG, ASSAM.
                                                                INDIA
2       Krishna                                                 Present      Arrest
        Ch Das                                                  Address:     Memo
                                                                DILLAI PS,   witness
                                                                KARBIANGL
                                                                ONG,Bishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 4

                                                                ASSAM,
                                                                INDIA
                                                                Permanent
                                                                Address:
                                                                DILLAI PS,
                                                                KARBIANGL
                                                                ONG,
                                                                ASSAM.
                                                                INDIA
3       Rajib         Father:                1992               Present      Complainants
        Borah         Dhaniram Borah                            Address:
                                                                DILLAI
                                                                PS,
                                                                KARBIANGL
                                                                ONG,
                                                                ASSAM,
                                                                INDIA
                                                                Permanent
                                                       Address:
                                                       DILLAI
                                                       PS,
                                                       KARBIANGL
                                                       ONG,
                                                       ASSAM.
                                                       INDIA
4    Sarat                                02/11/1993   Present     IO
     Kakoti                                            Address:
                                                       ASSAM,
                                                       INDIA
                                                       Permanent
                                                       Address:
                                                       ASSAM,
                                                       INDIA
5    Shri John                                         Present     Other
     Das                                               Address:    Witness
                                                       BOKAJAN,
                                                       KARBIAN
                                                       GLONG,
                                                       ASSAM,
                                                       INDIA
                                                       Permanent
                                                       Address:
                                                       BOKAJAN,
                                                       KARBIAN
                                                       GLONG,
                                                       ASSAM,
                                                       INDIA
6    Jiten         Father:    Late                     Present     Other
     Gogoi         Mukta Gogoi                         Address:    Witness
                                                       DILLAIBishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 5

                                                       PS,
                                                       KARBIANGL
                                                       ONG,
                                                       ASSAM,
                                                       INDIA
                                                       Permanent
                                                       Address:
                                                       DILLAI
                                                       PS,
                                                       KARBIANGL
                                                       ONG,
                                                       ASSAM.
                                                       INDIA
7    Sankar                                            Present     Other
     Mahana                                            Address:    Witness
     yak                                               DILLAI
                                                    PS,
                                                    KARBIANGL
                                                    ONG ,
                                                    ASSAM,
                                                    INDIA
                                                    Permanent
                                                    Address:
                                                    DILLAI
                                                    PS,
                                                    KARBIANGL
                                                    ONG,
                                                    ASSAM.
                                                    INDIA
8     Baidujya                                      Present     Other
      Khanikar                                      Address:    Witness
                                                    DILLAI
                                                    PS,
                                                    KARBIANGL
                                                    ONG,
                                                    ASSAM,
                                                    INDIA
                                                    Permanent
                                                    Address:
                                                    DILLAI
                                                    PS,
                                                    KARBIANGL
                                                    ONG,
                                                    ASSAM.
                                                    INDIA
9     Mintu                                         Present     Other
      Daimary                                       Address:    Witness
                                                    DILLAIBishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 6

                                                    PS,
                                                    KARBIANGL
                                                    ONG,
                                                    ASSAM,
                                                    INDIA
                                                    Permanent
                                                    Address:
                                                    DILLAI
                                                    PS,
                                                    KARBIANGL
                                                    ONG,
                                                    ASSAM
                                                    INDIA
10    Monjur        Father:                1989     Present     Search
      Ahmed         Abdul                           Address:    & siege
                    Kluqu                           Dhainsing   Witness
                                                    Engleng,
                                                    DILLAI
                                                     PS,
                                                     KARBIANGL
                                                     ONG,
                                                     ASSAM,
                                                     INDIA,
                                                     Permanent
                                                     Address:
                                                     Kania
                                                     Tokbi,
                                                     DILLAI
                                                     PS,
                                                     KARBINGLO
                                                     NG,
                                                     ASSAM,
                                                     INDIA
11    Ramesh        Father:                1985      Present        Search
      Raj           Jagat Bh.                        Address:       & siege
                    Rai                              Kania          Witness
                                                     Tokbi,DILLAI
                                                     PS,KARBING
                                                     LONG,
                                                     ASSAM,
                                                     INDIA
                                                     Permanent
                                                     Address:
                                                     Kania
                                                     Tokbi,DILLAI
                                                     PS,ASSAM,
                                                     INDIA
                                                     Permanent
                                                     Address:
                                                     KaniaBishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 7

                                                     Tokbi,DILLAI
                                                     PS,KARBING
                                                     LONG,
                                                     ASSAM,
                                                     INDIA
12    Joherul       Father:                1971      Present        Search
      Ali           Jagat Bh.                        Address:       & siege
                    Rai                              BONGAIGA       Witness
                                                     ON,BON
                                                     GAIGAON,
                                                     ASSAM,
                                                     INDIA
14. If FR is false (F.R. false), indicate action taken or proposed to be taken u/s
182/211 I.P.C /217/248 B.N.S:
15. Result of Laboratory analysis :
16. Brief facts of the case :
The brief of the case is that on 10/04/2023 informant SI (UB) Rajib Borah of Dillai
PS lodged an FIR at PS stating that based on a specific information received from
reliable source, a Naka checking was conducted by self along with ASI Jiten Gogoi, Ic
Lahorijan and staff on NH 36 in front of Lahorijan PP. During checking at about
06:20 AM one Truck B/R No. AS 01 NC 4355 which was coming from Dimapur side
was signaled to stop at Naka checking point and the vehicle stopped. After receiving
authorization from SDPO Bokajan to search the vehicle, I have served Notice U/S 50
NDPS Act to the driver of the said vehicle whom I have explained about the notice
Clearly and on their concerned I along with my staff started search of the vehicle in
presence of independent witnesses. On thorough search of the vehicle, total 02 (two)
nos, identical soap boxes containing suspected to be Heroin covered with black
polythene which was kept concealed inside the Tarpaulin and kept at the hood of the
truck. During spot interrogation, the driver of the vehicle Joherul Ali 52 Yrs S/O Lt
Ahmed Choudhary, R/O Morth Bongaigaon, PS Bongaigaon stated that the suspected
drugs is belongs to one another person of the vehicle namely Md Dimpul Ali S/O
Mansur Ali R/O No. 2 Meda, PS Sorbhog, Dist Barpeta, Assam who was came with
him from Dimapur and he kept the soap box inside the tarpaulins. Suspected
recovered from the vehicle was subjected to field test by using Deflection Kit in
presence of SDPO Bokajan and above name eye witnesses and the result comes
positive for Heroin. The recovered 02 (two) packets of Identical soap boxes has been
weighed by using digital weight machine belonging to PP (which was quoted in
Lahorijan pp gde No. 537 Dated 31/12/2023) and found total 24.8 grams after
weight. Accordingly the recovered soap boxes containing suspected to be Heroin
along with other items were seized the recovered psychotropic substance. Sealed and
packet the psychotropic substance at PO in presence of independent witnesses. OpenBishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 8

the sealed packed before Hon’ble Judicial Magistrate 1st class, Bokajan and drawn
the sample and samples have sent to Forensic science Kahilipara Guwahati for
examination. The suspected accused person have been arrested and forwarded to the
Judicial custody. Expert opinion report was collected and the report is positive for
Heroin. The recovered psychotropic substances have identified as Heroin, which are
highly addictive drugs that affect Central Nervous System. It is an illegal drug with
high market value and its uses have immense medical, social and economic
consequences. Its uses have been increasing in today’s society and mostly amongst
the young generation which has devastating impact on human resource as well as
social health. The drug trafficking involves a huge national international gang which
is also seen to be prevalent in Assam. The arrested accused person revealed that he
carried the Heroin form Dimapur. This statement proves the interstate transition of
psychotropic substances. Above facts and circumstance, a prima facie is found well
established U/S 21 (b) of NDPS Act against the arrested accused person. I have sent
the arrested accused person named Md. Dimpul Ali S/O Mansur Ali, R/O No.2 Meda,
PS Sorbhog . Dist, Barpeta Honble court for trial against him under aforementioned
section of Law.
17. Refer Notice served : No Date:
18. Dispatched on:
20. List of enclosures: As annexed:
IIF1.pdf, IIF2.pdf, IIF3-1.pdf, IIF4-1 pdf Forwarded by Officer in charge Name: Nitul
Saikia Rank: SI (Sub-Inspector) No.:
Signature of Investigation Officer submitting final report/charge sheet Name: SARAT
KAKOTI Rank: SI (Sub-Inspector) No.:”
9. Learned counsel for the appellant stated that the Vehicle since seized has been lying unattended
at the Police station campus and the same is lying exposed to sun and rain thereby rendering it to
natural wear and tear and deterioration. He referred to and relied upon Sections 451 and 457 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure (‘for short ‘Cr.P.C.’) to seek release of the Vehicle. The relevant portions
of Sections 451 and 457 of Cr.P.C. are reproduced hereinbelow:-
“451. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial in certain
cases.—When any property is produced before any criminal court during any inquiry
or trial, the court may make such order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such
property pending the conclusion of the inquiry or trial, and, if the property is subject
to speedy and natural decay, or if it is otherwise expedient so to do, the court may,
after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, order it to be sold or otherwise
disposed of. Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,‘property’ includes—Bishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 9

(a) property of any kind or document which is produced before the court or which is
in its custody.
(b) any property regarding which an offence appears to have been committed or
which appears to have been used for the commission of any offence.
* * *
457. Procedure by police upon seizure of property.— (1) Whenever the seizure of
property by any police officer is reported to a Magistrate under the provisions of this
Code, and such property is not produced before a criminal court during an inquiry or
trial, the Magistrate may make such order as he thinks fit respecting the disposal of
such property or the delivery of such property to the person entitled to the possession
thereof, or if such person cannot be ascertained, respecting the custody and
production of such property.
(2) If the person so entitled is known, the Magistrate may order the property to be delivered to him
on such conditions (if any) as the Magistrate thinks fit and if such person is unknown, the
Magistrate may detain it and shall, in such case, issue a proclamation specifying the articles of which
such property consists, and requiring any person who may have a claim thereto, to appear before
him and establish his claim within six months from the date of such proclamation.”
10. He submitted that this Court in the case of Sunderbhai Ambala Desai V. State of Gujarat, (2002)
10 SCC 283 has held, “In our view, whatever be the situation, it is of no use to keep such seized
vehicles at the police stations for a long period. It is for the magistrate to pass appropriate orders
immediately by taking appropriate bond and guarantee as well as security for return of the said
vehicles, if required at any point of time. This can be done pending hearing of applications for return
of such vehicles.”
11. He pointed out that the High Court of Judicature at Patna in Bhola Singh @ Ayush Singh vs. The
State of Bihar, Criminal Misc. No. 40912/2016, has held that “…… As far as vehicle is concerned,
there was no reason to reject the application of the petitioner for its release to interim custody of the
applicant claiming to be bona fide owner of the vehicle subject to the certain conditions to ensure
production of the vehicle to the court as and when required during pendency of the trail or
confiscation proceeding………”
12. In view of the above judgments, he prayed that the Vehicle be released to the appellant, being its
rightful owner, subject to conditions as may be imposed by the trial Court.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT-STATE OF ASSAM
13. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent-State of Assam submitted that the NDPS Act,
which deals with drug trafficking, is a special enactment and a complete code in itself. [See: Noor
Aga vs. State of Punjab & Another, (2008) 16 SCC 417; Mukesh Singh vs. State (Narcotic Branch ofBishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 10

Delhi), (2020) 10 SCC 120 and Directorate of Revenue Intelligence vs. Amit Kumar, 2016 SCC
OnLine Del 6083]. According to her, the NDPS Act does not – unlike the Code of Criminal
Procedure – contemplate interim release of a seized conveyance during pendency of the trial.
14. She stated that for the adjudication of this case, Chapter IV (Offences and Penalties) and Chapter
V (Procedure) of NDPS Act are relevant, as they encompass the provisions directly applicable to the
alleged offences and the procedural mechanisms to address them. The relevant provisions of
Chapter IV and V of the NDPS Act relied upon by the learned counsel for respondent-State are
reproduced hereinbelow:-
i. Section 36C of the NDPS Act: “Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (including the
provisions as to bail and bonds) shall apply to the proceedings before a Special
Court….” ii. Section 51 of the NDPS Act: “The provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, to all warrants issued and arrests, searches and seizures made
under this Act.” iii. Section 52A(1): “The Central Government may, having regard to
the hazardous nature, vulnerability to theft, substitution, constraint of proper storage
space or any other relevant consideration, in respect of any narcotic drugs,
psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify such narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled
substances or conveyance or class of narcotic drugs, class of psychotropic substances,
class of controlled substances or conveyances, which shall, as soon as may be after
their seizure, be disposed of by such officer and in such manner as that Government
may, from time to time, determine….” iv. Section 60 of the NDPS Act:
“60. Liability of illicit drugs, substances, plants, articles and conveyances to
confiscation.—[(1) Whenever any offence punishable under this Act has been
committed, the narcotic drug, psychotropic substance, controlled substance, opium
poppy, coca plant, cannabis plant, materials, apparatus and utensils in respect of
which or by means of which such offence has been committed, shall be liable to
confiscation.] (2) Any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance [or controlled
substances] lawfully produced, imported inter-State, exported inter-State, imported
into India, transported, manufactured, possessed, used, purchased or sold along
with, or in addition to, any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance [or controlled
substances] which is liable to confiscation under sub-section (1) and there
receptacles, packages and coverings in which any narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance [or controlled substances], materials, apparatus or utensils liable to
confiscation under sub-section (1) is found, and the other contents, if any, of such
receptacles or packages shall likewise be liable to confiscation.
(3) Any animal or conveyance used in carrying any narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance [or controlled substances], or any article liable to confiscation under
sub-section (1) or sub-Bishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 11

section (2) shall be liable to confiscation, unless the owner of the animal or conveyance proves that
it was so used without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the
person-in-charge of the animal or conveyance and that each of them had taken all reasonable
precautions against such use.
v. Second Proviso to Section 63 of the NDPS Act:
63. ……..
Provided further that if any such article or thing, other than a narcotic drug, psychotropic
substances [controlled substance], the opium poppy, coca plant or cannabis plant is liable to speedy
and natural decay, or if the court is of the opinion that its sale would be for the benefit of its owner,
it may at any time direct it to be sold; and the provisions of this sub-section shall, as nearly as may
be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of the sale.”
15. She further submitted that the question that arises for consideration in the present case, arose
for consideration before the High Courts of Delhi, Kerala and Calcutta where the interpretation
forwarded by the respondent- State has been affirmed. The judgments relied upon by learned
counsel for the respondent-State are reproduced hereinbelow:-
A. Smt. Narender Kaur vs. Arun Sheoran, Intelligence Officer, Narcotics Control
Bureau, 2000 SCC OnLine Del 502 wherein it has been held as under:-
“12. This Act obviously is a special legislation intended to deal with a great global
malady of drug abuse caused due to drug trafficking. To that extent, it is a complete
code. Any other provision of law if it impinges on the objects sought to be achieved by
this Act will be contrary to this enactment and necessarily over-ridden by the Act,
expressly or by implication. Conveyance used for carrying the contraband is liable to
confiscation, of course, after making due inquiry. Second proviso to Sub-section (2)
of Section 63 of the Act itself provides for interim orders for the disposal of any
article or thing other than a narcotic drug etc. which is liable to speedy and natural
decay, or if the Court is of the opinion that its sale would be for the benefit of its
owner, to direct it to be sold. This specifically provides for interim orders regarding
disposal of seized articles or goods other than the contraband, and obviously includes
a conveyance used in transportation. This by necessary implication excludes any
other interim order to be made.
13. The provisions of Section 451 which provides for order for interim custody and
disposal of the property pending trial is identical, in case the property is subject to
speedy and natural decay and if it is otherwise in the interest of the owner. To this
extent, the provisions of Section 451 of the Code are not applicable. The Bombay
High Court in B.S. Rawant case (supra), in this behalf, in para 10, has observed as
under:— “10. The object of the Act is to see that the vehicle which is used for such an
offence is not made available to the persons who have indulged in these activities.Bishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 12

They shall not have the benefit of such a vehicle. By and large if an accused person is
himself the owner of the vehicle and he uses such a vehicle for the purpose of
conveying the drugs, then of course, it is possible for the prosecution to contend that
it is against the interest of Justice that such a vehicle be given to the accused pending
the trial. But in a given case, it might be that a vehicle belonging to innocent owner is
stolen by the accused, and in that event, seized by the officer, it does not mean that
such an owner has to wait till the trial is completed for the purpose of getting an
order of return of the vehicle from the Magistrate. In such cases, subject to a
guarantee that the vehicle becomes available for the purpose of confiscation, if any,
the Court has necessarily the Jurisdiction to pass an order for interim custody either
under S. 451 or S. 457(1) of the Criminal P.C. as the case may be. An order under S.
451 or S. 457(1) of the Criminal P.C. Guarantees return of the vehicle at the time of
the final hearing of the matter, or as and when called upon by the Court. It secures,
subject to certain terms and conditions, the interim custody of the vehicle, pending
the trial. In fact, the operation of S. 451 or S. 457(1) of the Criminal P.C. comes into
existence only after the vehicle is seized and brought into safe custody, as provided
under Section 55 of the Act. If it is so, it cannot be said that Section 451 or Section
457(1) of the Criminal P.C. is in any way inconsistent with the scheme of the Act.”
14. According to this reasoning, there would be two yardsticks to be used, one in case
the person carrying the contraband is the owner of the vehicle, that vehicle would not
be given on interim custody to its owner, and another in case some other person
claims ownership of the vehicle, the vehicle could be given to him by way of interim
custody. In that case, persons engaged in such illegal trafficking would find it more
advantageous not to use their own vehicle but use vehicle of someone else and in the
latter case merely by the flat of mere saying of owner of such vehicle that the vehicle
was used without his or his agent's knowledge or connivance or of the person-
in-charge of the conveyance, he would be able to secure the interim custody of the vehicle. And such
vehicle could again be similarly used. This is likely to defeat the very purpose of the Act which
provides for confiscation of such vehicle. Such an Interpretation, in my respectful view, would be
against the object and purpose of the Act.
15. Assuming the petitioner is the owner of the vehicle but the question whether the vehicle was
used without her knowledge or connivance is a question of fact to be determined after evidence, if
any, is produced in proper inquiry. It may not be safe always to accept such a plea as a gospel truth
to give interim custody of the vehicle to such a person. Question remains that the vehicle in question
was used as a conveyance by the accused who is the husband of the petitioner for carrying the
contraband. There seems to be no sound reason that if the owner is not entitled to interim custody
of such vehicle because the vehicle is liable to be confiscated, why another person who may be the
owner of the vehicle should be given the custody of the vehicle during the pendency of the case till
he proves his non-complicity. As also observed by the Bombay High Court, the purpose of the Act is
to see that the vehicle which is used for such conveyance is not made available to the persons
indulging in these activities. Confiscation of the vehicle is an additional safeguard to discourage thisBishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 13

crime.
16. As already noticed, the vehicle has been kept secured in a garage and it is not lying in open and
as such there is no danger of it being damaged by vagaries of weather. If the vehicle is returned to
the petitioner and ultimately it is held that it is liable to be confiscated, its use by the petitioner will
benefit the petitioner and defeat the purpose and object of the Act and when ultimately it is to be
confiscated it would have lost its value. Moreover, accused Amar Pal Singh is the husband of the
petitioner Smt. Narender Kaur. In his statement made before the investigating officer on 25-3-1997
under Section 67 of the Act, he has stated that this car was purchased in the year 1997 and was a
second-hand one; it is in the name of his wife but was purchased by them after selling another Car
No. DL-2C B- 3835; some amount was contributed by his wife and some amount was contributed by
him. In the circumstances, it is also not certain whether the car exclusively belongs to the petitioner.
It is also seen that on search of his house at C-89. Fateh Nagar, New Delhi, inter alia, 4 gms. of
Heroin, one vacuum sealer, small weighing scale were recovered. This would show that some activity
in drug is also being done at the house where the petitioner lives. This must be in the knowledge of
the petitioner. The use of the car in the present case in the circumstances may not be without her
knowledge. B. Ganga Hire Purchase Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of Punjab and Others, (1999) 5 SCC 670
wherein it has been held as under:-
“2. Under sub-section (3) of Section 60 of the NDPS Act, any animal or conveyance
used in carrying any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance is liable to confiscation,
unless the owner of the conveyance proves that it was so used without the knowledge
or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the person in charge of the
animal or conveyance and that each of them had taken all reasonable precaution
against such use. There is no dispute that the vehicle in question was found to be
carrying certain narcotics. The bone of contention of the appellant is that in view of
the hire- purchase agreement, the appellant continues legally to be “the owner” of the
vehicle so long as the entire hire-purchase money has not been paid and therefore
unless and until it is established that the vehicle was used for carrying of narcotics
with the knowledge of the appellant, an order of confiscation could not have been
passed. In support of this contention, reliance has been placed on a decision of a
learned Single Judge of the Rajasthan High Court in the case of Punjab Kashmir
Finance (P) Ltd. v. State [1993 Cri LJ 498 (Raj)]. The expression “owner” has not
been defined in the NDPS Act. There is also no dispute that under the hire-purchase
agreement the title to the vehicle is retained with the appellant until and unless the
entire hire-purchase money is paid back. But, if the contention of the appellant is
accepted, then all the vehicles which have been purchased on hire purchase basis,
cannot be confiscated notwithstanding the fact that the vehicles were found to be
used for commission of offences under the NDPS Act in carrying narcotic and
psychotropic substances. The very purpose for engrafting sub- section (3) of Section
60 of the NDPS Act is to have it as a deterrent measure to check the offences under
the Act in question which have been found to be dangerous to the entire society. In
the absence of any definition of “owner” in the NDPS Act, it would be reasonable for
us to construe that the expression “owner” must be held to mean the “registeredBishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 14

owner” of the vehicle in whose name the vehicle stands registered under the
provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act.
3. In view of the aforesaid interpretation of the expression “owner” in sub-section (3)
of Section 60 of the NDPS Act, the appellant cannot be permitted to urge that the
order for confiscation is bad as he had no knowledge of the fact that the vehicle was
used for carrying any narcotic substances. The High Court, therefore, in our opinion,
was justified in rejecting the contention of the appellant that the truck in question
having been taken on a hire-purchase agreement, for the purpose of sub-section (3)
of Section 60, the appellant shall be treated to be the owner.” C. Union of India vs.
Dinesh Kumar Verma, (2005) 9 SCC 330 wherein it has been held as under:-
“3. By the impugned order, the High Court has directed for release of the vehicle
during trial of the accused for violation of the provisions of the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (the NDPS Act). In our view, in the facts and
circumstances of the present case, the High Court was not justified in releasing the
vehicle.
4. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed, the impugned order rendered by the High Court
is set aside and the prayer for release of vehicle made on behalf of the respondent is
rejected. The respondent is directed to surrender the vehicle within a period of one
month from today, failing which it would be open to the police to seize the same and
report compliance to this Court within a period of six weeks from today.” D. Shajahan
vs. Inspector of Excise and Others, 2019 SCC OnLine Ker 3685 wherein it has been
held as under:-
These matters have come before us by way of a reference as per order of the learned
Single Judge dated 9/4/2019. It was noticed that this Court in Hassainar Aseez B. v.
State of Kerala (2017 (2) KLT 741) held that a vehicle which was seized under the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as
NDPS Act) could be released subject to certain conditions if an application is filed u/s
451 of the Criminal Procedure Code. It was observed that S.52A of the NDPS Act read
with the judgment of the Apex Court in Union of India v. Mohanlal [(2016) 3 SCC
379] indicates that the Magistrate does not have jurisdiction to pass orders u/s 451
Cr.P.C. In the light of the aforesaid controversy, the matter has been referred to this
Court.
xxx xxx xxx
6. When a Special Act prescribes the procedure for dealing in specified goods and the
NDPS Act being a special statute and latter in time, the provisions of the special
statute has to be followed by the Magistrate. In other words, the Magistrate may not
have jurisdiction to entertain a petition u/s 451 of Cr.P.C. in the light of the special
provision made u/s 52A of the NDPS Act. In fact, in Mohanlal (supra), the ApexBishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 15

Court had issued certain directions which are extracted hereunder:-
“31. To sum up we direct as under:
31.1. No sooner the seizure of any narcotic drugs and psychotropic and controlled
substances and conveyances is effected, the same shall be forwarded to the officer in
charge of the nearest police station or to the officer empowered under Section 53 of
the Act. The officer concerned shall then approach the Magistrate with an application
under Section 52-A(2) of the Act, which shall be allowed by the Magistrate as soon as
may be required under sub-section (3) of Section 52-A, as discussed by us in the body
of this judgment under the heading “seizure and sampling”. The sampling shall be
done under the supervision of the Magistrate as discussed in Paras 15 to 19 of this
order.
31.2. The Central Government and its agencies and so also the State Governments
shall within six months from today take appropriate steps to set up storage facilities
for the exclusive storage of seized narcotic drugs and psychotropic and controlled
substances and conveyances duly equipped with vaults and double-locking system to
prevent theft, pilferage or replacement of the seized drugs. The Central Government
and the State Governments shall also designate an officer each for their respective
storage facility and provide for other steps, measures as stipulated in Standing Order
No. 1 of 1989 to ensure proper security against theft, pilferage or replacement of the
seized drugs.
31.3. The Central Government and the State Governments shall be free to set up a
storage facility for each district in the States and depending upon the extent of
seizure and store required, one storage facility for more than one districts.
31.4. Disposal of the seized drugs currently lying in the Police Malkhanas and other
places used for storage shall be carried out by the DDCs concerned in terms of the
directions issued by us in the body of this judgment under the heading “disposal of
drugs”.
7. In the light of the aforesaid law laid down by the Apex Court, the said procedure
has to be followed in every case and there is no two way of looking at it. Apparently,
in such instances, going by the statutory provision under the Special Act, the power of
the Magistrate to consider a claim u/s 451 of Cr.P.C. stands denuded.
Reference is answered accordingly.
E. In Re: Moumita Saha, 2023, SCC OnLine Cal 1094 wherein it has been held as under:-
“13. It may be that there is no express bar contained in the NDPS Act for grant of
interim custody in order to protect the innocent owner of the vehicle. It would not beBishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 16

out of context to state that Section 37 of the NDPS Act provides that the bail can only
be granted where there are reasonable grounds for believing that accused is not guilty
of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail. The
spirit of section 37 and the other provisions of the said Act make it clear that strict
applications thereof are required to achieve the purpose, so that further offence
relating to illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances could be
prevented. Before passing an order of releasing the vehicle involved in such offence,
the court has to satisfy the reasons which justify such release. The NDPS Act is a
special Act, which has been enacted with a view to make stringent provisions for the
control and regulation of operations relating to narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances. In the present case petitioner/owner of the vehicle herself is an accused
and she is still absconding and did not make co-operation with the investigating
agency, in spite of repeated reminders. Accordingly it would not be unreasonable to
hold that the vehicle in question used for committing the offence, if released on
terms, then there would be every chance of committing such offence with the help of
the same vehicle. Petitioner's innocence could have been understandable, if she made
co-operation with the investigating agency.
14. Under the said provision if the owner of the vehicle is not an accused, in that case
a separate and independent proceeding has to be drawn for confiscation in terms of
the express provisions in Section 60(3) of the Act, to protect an innocent owner
before confiscating his vehicle.
15. Accordingly, I am of the view that this is not an appropriate case where such
prayer can be allowed and accordingly, the court below has not committed any error
in rejecting the said prayer made by the petitioner and as such, the order impugned
does not call for any interference.”
16. She further stated that in the present case, the seized vehicle is a material
evidence that directly links the accused to the commission of the offence, particularly
since it was used as a means to transport and conceal the contraband substance. She
stated that during the course of the trial, the seized vehicle will be required for
inspection, demonstration or verification to substantiate the prosecution’s case and
to establish the manner in which the offence was committed. This, according to her,
includes, but is not limited to, demonstrating the concealment of the contraband, its
storage within the vehicle etc. She contended that releasing the said seized vehicle
prematurely on zimma would jeopardize the trial, as it may not be available for such
purposes as and when required.
17. She stated that the likelihood of the conveyance, if released, being used again for
transporting/trafficking contraband substances cannot be ruled out. She contended
that vehicles involved in the commission of offences under stringent laws, such as the
NDPS Act, serve as essential tools for offenders to execute their illegal activities and
releasing such a vehicle prematurely may increase the risk of its reuse.Bishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 17

18. She contended that releasing the seized vehicle on zimma would encourage the
misuse of third-party vehicles for the transportation and smuggling of drugs, which
would significantly undermine the efforts to combat illegal activities. She lastly
contended that drug traffickers and smugglers often adopt the strategy of using
vehicles that are not directly linked to their own ownership in order to evade law
enforcement scrutiny and to reduce the risk of detection and confiscation.
Accordingly, she prayed that the seized vehicle be not released.
COURT’S REASONING NO SPECIFIC BAR/ RESTRICTION UNDER THE NDPS ACT FOR
RELEASE IN THE INTERIM OF ANY SEIZED VEHICLE.
19. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having examined the issue at hand, this Court
finds that different Courts have taken divergent views with regard to interim release of conveyances
during the pendency of the trial in NDPS cases. While the courts in cases referred to by learned
counsel for the Respondent-State of Assam have not released the vehicles in the interim during
NDPS trial, yet in General Insurance Council & Ors. vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, (2010) 6 SCC 768;
Gurbinder Singh @ Shinder vs. State of Punjab, 2016 SCC OnLine P&H 16026; Tej Singh vs. State of
Haryana, 2020 SCC OnLine P&H 4679; Shams Tavrej vs. Union of India, 2023 SCC OnLine All 1154;
Manakram vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, Crl. Rev. 2421/2021; Nirmal Singh vs. State of Punjab,
CRR- 1208-2018 (O&M); Kawal Jeet Kaur vs. State of Karnataka, 2024:KHC- K:5691 and Bhagirath
vs. State of Rajasthan, 2024: RJ-JD:36868, the Courts have directed release of the vehicles in the
interim in NDPS cases.
20. The judgements of this Court are confined to their facts or in the context of the expression
‘owner’ and do not lay down any general proposition of law. Consequently, the issue would have to
be examined on first principles.
21. Upon a reading of the NDPS Act, this Court is of the view that the seized vehicles can be
confiscated by the trial court only on conclusion of the trial when the accused is convicted or
acquitted or discharged. Further, even where the Court is of the view that the vehicle is liable for
confiscation, it must give an opportunity of hearing to the person who may claim any right to the
seized vehicle before passing an order of confiscation. However, the seized vehicle is not liable to
confiscation if the owner of the seized vehicle can prove that the vehicle was used by the accused
person without the owner’s knowledge or connivance and that he had taken all reasonable
precautions against such use of the seized vehicle by the accused person.
22. This Court is further of the opinion that there is no specific bar/restriction under the provisions
of the NDPS Act for return of any seized vehicle used for transporting narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance in the interim pending disposal of the criminal case.
23. In the absence of any specific bar under the NDPS Act and in view of Section 51 of NDPS Act, the
Court can invoke the general power under Sections 451 and 457 of the Cr.P.C. for return of the
seized vehicle pending final decision of the criminal case. Consequently, the trial Court has the
discretion to release the vehicle in the interim. However, this power would have to be exercised inBishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 18

accordance with law in the facts and circumstances of each case.
COURTS WILL LEAN AGAINST ANY CONSTRUCTION THAT WOULD PRODUCE AN ABSURD
OR UNJUST RESULT.
24. It is trite law that the more absurd a suggested conclusion of construction is, the more the court
will lean against that conclusion. That is ordinarily so whether one is construing a contract or a
statute. [See: Hatzl v. XL Insurance Co. Ltd. [2009] EWCA Civ. 223].
25. The presumption against absurdity is found in the brief observation of Lord Saville agreeing with
his colleagues in the case of Noone [R (on the application of Noone) v. Governor of HMP Drake Hall
[2010] UKSC 30]. Lord Saville says simply:
“I would allow this appeal. For the reasons given by Lord Phillips and Lord Mance, I
have no doubt that by one route or another the legislation must be construed so as to
avoid what would otherwise produce irrational and indefensible results that
Parliament could not have intended”
26. If the respondent-State’s interpretation is accepted, then in a case where an accused is arrested
carrying heroin in a private plane or a private bus or a private ship without the knowledge and
consent of the management and staff of the private plan or bus or ship, the plane/bus/ship would
have to be seized till the trial is over!
27. Though the risk of misuse by the accused or third party of the same plane or bus or ship cannot
be ruled out, yet the Courts do not take coercive action on the basis of fear or suspicion or
hypothetical situation.
28. Undoubtedly, the Vehicle is a critical piece of material evidence that may be required for
inspection to substantiate the prosecution’s case, yet the said requirement can be met by stipulating
conditions while releasing the Vehicle in interim on superdari like videography and still
photographs to be authenticated by the Investigating Officer, owner of the Vehicle and accused by
signing the said inventory as well as restriction on sale/transfer of the Vehicle.
BROADLY SPEAKING THERE ARE FOUR SCENARIOS
29. Though seizure of drugs/substances from conveyances can take place in a number of situations,
yet broadly speaking there are four scenarios in which the drug or substance is seized from a
conveyance. Firstly, where the owner of the vehicle is the person from whom the possession of
contraband drugs/substance is recovered. Secondly, where the contraband is recovered from the
possession of the agent of the owner i.e. like driver or cleaner hired by the owner. Thirdly, where the
vehicle has been stolen by the accused and contraband is recovered from such stolen vehicle.
Fourthly, where the contraband is seized / recovered from a third-party occupant (with or without
consideration) of the vehicle without any allegation by the police that the contraband was stored and
transported in the vehicle with the owner’s knowledge and connivance. In the first two scenarios,Bishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 19

the owner of the vehicle and/or his agent would necessarily be arrayed as an accused. In the third
and fourth scenario, the owner of the vehicle and/or his agent would not be arrayed as an accused.
30. This Court is of the view that criminal law has not to be applied in a vacuum but to the facts of
each case. Consequently, it is only in the first two scenarios that the vehicle may not be released on
superdari till reverse burden of proof is discharged by the accused-owner. However, in the third and
fourth scenarios, where no allegation has been made in the charge-sheet against the owner and/or
his agent, the vehicle should normally be released in the interim on superdari subject to the owner
furnishing a bond that he would produce the vehicle as and when directed by the Court and/or he
would pay the value of the vehicle as determined by the Court on the date of the release, if the Court
is finally of the opinion that the vehicle needs to be confiscated.
31. This Court clarifies that the aforesaid discussion should not be taken as laying down a rigid
formula as it will be open to the trial Courts to take a different view, if the facts of the case so
warrant. SUPREME COURT IN SIMILAR FACTS IN SAINABA VS. STATE OF KERALA AND
ANOTHER HAS RELEASED THE VEHICLE
32. In the present case, this Court finds that after conclusion of investigation, a chargesheet has
been filed in the Court of Special Judge, NDPS Karbi Anglong. In the said chargesheet, neither the
owner of the Vehicle nor the driver has been arrayed as an accused. Only a third-party occupant has
been arrayed as an accused. The police after investigation has not found that the appellant i.e. the
owner of the vehicle, has allowed his vehicle to transport contraband drugs/ substances with his
knowledge or connivance or that he or his agent had not taken all reasonable precautions against
such use. Consequently, the conveyance is entitled to be released on superdari.
33. In fact, the Supreme Court in similar facts in Sainaba vs. State of Kerala and Another, 2022 SCC
OnLine SC 1784 has held as under:-
“6. The appellant has urged inter alia that as per Section 36- C read with Section 51 of
the NDPS Act, Criminal Procedure Code would be applicable for proceedings by a
Special Court under NDPS Act and Section 451 has an inbuilt provision to impose any
specific condition on the appellant while releasing the vehicle. The appellant is
undoubtedly the registered owner of the vehicle but had not participated in the
offence as alleged by the prosecution nor had knowledge of the alleged transaction.
7. Learned counsel seeks to rely on the judgment of this Court in Sunderbhai Ambalal
Desai v. State of Gujarat, (2002) 10 SCC 283 opining that it is no use to keep such
seized vehicles at police station for a long period and it is open to the Magistrate to
pass appropriate orders immediately by taking a bond and a guarantee as well as
security for return of the said vehicle, if required at any point of time.
8. On hearing learned counsel for parties and in the conspectus of the facts and
circumstances of the case, and the legal provisions referred aforesaid, we are of the
view that this is an appropriate case for release of the vehicle on terms and conditionsBishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 20

to be determined by the Special Court.
9. The appeal is accordingly allowed leaving parties to bear their own costs.” IF THE
VEHICLE IN THE PRESENT CASE IS KEPT IN THE CUSTODY OF POLICE TILL
THE TRIAL IS OVER, IT WILL SERVE NO PURPOSE
34. This Court is also of the view that if the Vehicle in the present case is allowed to be kept in the
custody of police till the trial is over, it will serve no purpose. This Court takes judicial notice that
vehicles in police custody are stored in the open. Consequently, if the Vehicle is not released during
the trial, it will be wasted and suffering the vagaries of the weather, its value will only reduce.
35. On the contrary, if the Vehicle in question is released, it would be beneficial to the owner (who
would be able to earn his livelihood), to the bank/financier (who would be repaid the loan disbursed
by it) and to the society at large (as an additional vehicle would be available for transportation of
goods).
CONCLUSION
36. Consequently, the present Criminal Appeal is allowed with directions to the trial Court to release
the Vehicle in question in the interim on superdari after preparing a video and still photographs of
the vehicle and after obtaining all information/documents necessary for identification of the vehicle,
which shall be authenticated by the Investigating Officer, owner of the Vehicle and accused by
signing the same. Further, the appellant shall not sell or part with the ownership of the Vehicle till
conclusion of the trial and shall furnish an undertaking to the trial court that he shall surrender the
Vehicle within one week of being so directed and/or pay the value of the Vehicle (determined
according to Income Tax law on the date of its release), if so ultimately directed by the Court.
.……………….J. [Sanjay Karol] ……………….J. [Manmohan] New Delhi;
January 7, 2025Bishwajit Dey vs The State Of Assam on 7 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113274670/ 21